CNS2015 | san francisco
Innovations in Mind and Brain Science

:
Understanding the Brain and Mind
Elsevier’s books are available online via ScienceDirect
and in ebook or print format on the Elsevier Store!
CNS attendees save 30% off books/ebooks
when ordering from store.elsevier.com
Use code NEURO315. Offer ends April 30, 2015

ISBN: 9780123750709
Feb 2010 $89.95

ISBN: 9780124158054
Jan 2012 $59.95

ISBN: 9780124160088
Sep 2013 $89.95

ISBN: 9780124170421
Jan 2015 $99.95

ISBN: 9780124160408
Jul 2014 $150.00

ISBN: 9780123859488
May 2011 $105.00

ISBN: 9780123749512
Nov 2009 $116.00

ISBN: 9780124078185
May 2014 $59.95

ISBN: 9780124200715

ISBN: 9780124201330
Oct 2014 $99.95

ISBN: 9780123984517
Oct 2013 $99.95

ISBN: 9780123814319
Oct 2011 $83.95

Apr 2014 $99.95

Visit store.elsevier.com or info.sciencedirect.com
Join our community • facebook.com/elsevierneuroscience • twitter.com/ELSNeuroscience

Cognitive Neuroscience Society
22nd Annual Meeting, March 28-31, 2015
Hyatt Regency Hotel, San Francisco, California

2015 Annual Meeting Program
Contents
2015 Committees & Staff . . . . . . . . .
Schedule Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Keynote . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
George A. Miller Prize . . . . . . . . . . . .
Distinguished Career Contributions Award.
Young Investigator Award . . . . . . . . . .
Special Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Data Blitz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
General Information. . . . . . . . . . . . .
GSA/PFA Awards . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Exhibits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Save the Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Invited-Symposium Sessions . . . . . . . .
Mini-Symposium Sessions . . . . . . . . .
Poster Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session A . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session B . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session C . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session D . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session E . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session F. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Session G . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poster Topic Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hotel Floor Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

. .2
. .3
. .5
. .6
. .7
. .8
. .9
. 10
. 12
. 14
. 15
. 15
. 16
. 20
. 33
. 34
. 62
. 90
119
.147
.176
204
232
234
244

A Supplement of the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
c/o Center for the Mind and Brain
267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95616
ISSN 1096-8857 © CNS
www.cogneurosociety.org

2015 Committees & Staff
Governing Board

Mini-Symposium Committee

Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Marta Kutas, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Helen Neville, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
Santa Barbara (ex officio)
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California,
Davis (ex officio)
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
(ex officio)

Elizabeth Kensinger, Ph.D., Boston College
Adam Aron, Ph.D., University of California, San Diego
Lila Davachi, Ph.D., New York University
Gina Kuperberg, Ph.D., Harvard University
Uta Noppeneny Ph.D., University of Birmingham
Thad Polk, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daphna Shohamy, Ph.D., Columbia University
Marty Woldorff, Ph.D., Duke University

Program Committee

Kevin LaBar, Ph.D., Duke University (Chair)
Marvin Chun, Ph.D., Yale University
Sabine Kastner, Ph.D., Princeton University
Eleanor Maguire, Ph.D., University College London
Cathy Price, Ph.D., University College, London

Ken Paller, Ph.D., Northwestern University (Chair)
Brad Postle, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Madison
(Co-Chair)
Marie Banich, Ph.D., University of Colorado
Roberto Cabeza, Ph.D., Duke University
Manuel Carreiras, Ph.D., Basque Center on Cognition,
Brain and Language, Spain
Michael Chee, M.D., Duke University -NUS Graduate
Medical School, Singapore
Kia Nobre, Ph.D., University of Oxford

Poster Committee
Tobias Egner, Ph.D., Duke University (Chair)
Signe Bray, Ph.D., University of Calgary
Evangelia Chrysikou, Ph.D., University of Kansas
Brian Gonsalves, Ph.D., University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign
Brian Haas, Ph.D., University of Georgia
Matthew Jerram, Ph.D., Suffolk University
Jonas Oblesser, Ph.D., Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences
Janice Snyder, Ph.D., University of British Columbia
Rebecca Spencer, Ph.D., University of MassachusettsAmherst
Nicholas Turk-Browne, Ph.D., Princeton University

2

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Young Investigator Award Committee

Founding Committee (1994)
Michael S. Gazzaniga, Ph.D., University of California,
Santa Barbara
George R. Mangun, Ph.D., University of California, Davis
Steve Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Patti Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan
Daniel Schacter, Ph.D., Harvard University
Art Shimamura, Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley

Administrative Staff
Kate Tretheway, Executive Director
Sangay Wangmo, Administrative Assistant

TM Events, Inc. Meeting Staff
Tara Miller, Event Director
Kerry Bosch, Meeting Planner
Dustin Miller, Event Associate
Becky Gazzaniga, Event Associate
Brenna Miller, Staff & Volunteer Manager
Shauney Wilson, Event Associate
Shawna Lampkin, Event Associate
Jeff Wilson, Event Associate
Joan Carole, Exhibits Manager

Schedule Overview
Saturday, March 28
11:00 am – 3:00 pm

Exhibitor Check-In, Exhibit Hall

11:00 am – 7:00 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

2:00 – 3:30 pm

Keynote Address, Anjan Chatterjee, “The neuroscience of aesthetics and art”
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC (Q&A to follow), Grand Ballroom

3:30 – 4:00 pm

Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

3:30 – 5:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall

3:30 – 5:30 pm

Poster Session A, Exhibit Hall

5:30 – 6:30 pm

4th Annual Distinguished Career Contributions in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture –
Marta Kutas, “45 years of Cognitive Electrophysiology: Neither just psychology nor just
the brain but the visible electrical interface between the twain”, Grand Ballroom

6:30 – 7:30 pm

Welcome Reception, Atrium

Sunday, March 29
7:30 am – 6:30 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 – 8:30 am

Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall

8:00 – 10:00 am

Poster Session B, Exhibit Hall

8:00 am – 5:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall

10:00 am – 12:00 pm

Mini-Symposium 1 – “What can be, or should be, the relationship between language
and neuroscience?” Hanna Gauvin, Chair, Grand Ballroom A
Mini-Symposium 2 – “Zooming-in on the hippocampus: Advances in high-resolution
imaging in the context of cognitive aging and dementia” Naftali Raz, Chair,
Grand Ballroom B/C
Mini-Symposium 3 – “Reasoning: Origins and development” Kathy Mann Koepke, Chair,
Bay View Room

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Exhibit Expo, Exhibit Hall

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Lunch Break

1:30 – 2:30 pm

YIA Special Lectures, “Constructive Episodic Simulation of Future Events”
Donna Rose Addis and “Do humans make good decisions?” Christopher Summerfield,
Grand Ballroom A

1:30 – 3:30 pm

Data Blitz 1, Grand Ballroom B/C

2:30 – 3:30 pm

NIH Funding Workshop, Kathy Mann Koepke and Lisa Freund, NICHD/CDBB,
Grand Ballroom A

3:30 – 4:00 pm

Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

3:30 – 5:30 pm

Poster Session C, Exhibit Hall

5:30 – 6:30 pm

21st Annual George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture – Patricia Kuhl,
“The Neurogenetics of Language“, Grand Ballroom

7:00 pm

CNS Student Association Student Social Night, Hyatt Regency Reception Area

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

3

Schedule Overview

2015 Annual Meeting

Monday, March 30
8:00 – 8:30 am

Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall

8:00 am – 7:30 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

8:00 – 10:00 am

Poster Session D, Exhibit Hall

8:00 am – 7:30 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall (Exhibit Booths closed 10:00 am – 1:30 pm)

10:00 am – 12:00 pm

Mini-Symposium 4 – “Cerebellar contributions to learning and cognition” Rich Ivry,
Chair, Arseny Sokolov, Co-Chair, Grand Ballroom A
Mini-Symposium 5 – “Disrupting the face perception network” David Pitcher, Chair,
Grand Ballroom B/C
Mini-Symposium 6 – “Approaches to identify network connectivity in neuroimaging”
Vaughn Steele, Chair, Bay View Room

10:00 am – 1:30 pm

Exhibit Booths Closed, Exhibit Hall

12:00 – 1:00 pm

NSF Funding Workshop, Alumit Ishai, Director, NSF Cognitive Neuroscience Program,
Grand Ballroom B/C

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Lunch Break, (Exhibit Booths Closed)

1:30 – 3:30 pm

Poster Session E, Exhibit Hall

3:00 – 3:30-pm

Coffee Service, Exhibit Hall

3:30 – 5:30 pm

Mini-Symposium 7 – “Interactions between the prefrontal cortex and the medial temporal lobes supporting the control of memory retrieval” Michael Anderson, Chair, Grand
Ballroom A
Invited Symposium 1 – “The renaissance of EEG: An old dog teaching us new tricks”
Micah Murray, Chair, Grand Ballroom B/C

5:30 – 7:30 pm

Poster Session F, Exhibit Hall

Tuesday, March 31
8:00 – 8:30 am

Continental Breakfast, Exhibit Hall

8:00 – 10:00 am

Poster Session G, Exhibit Hall

8:00 am – 12:00 pm

Exhibits on Display, Exhibit Hall

8:00 am – 3:30 pm

Onsite Registration & Pre-Registration Check-In, Grand Ballroom Foyer

10:00 am – 12:00 pm

Mini-Symposium 8 – “Temporal coordination of neuronal processes by cross-frequency
interactions” Ole Jensen, Chair, Grand Ballroom A
Mini-Symposium 9 – “Fresh perspectives on social perception: From functional specialization to connectivity” Emily Cross, Chair, Grand Ballroom B/C
Data Blitz 2, Bay View Room

12:00 – 1:00 pm

Journal Reviewers Workshop, Toby Charkin, (Elsevier), Chair, Grand Ballroom B/C

12:00 – 1:30 pm

Lunch Break

1:30 – 3:30 pm

Invited Symposium 2 – “The Changing Brain—Insights from Lifespan Cognitive Neuroscience” Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz and Michael D. Rugg, Co-Chairs, Grand Ballroom A
Invited Symposium 3 – “Decisions, emotion, the self, and medial prefrontal cortex”
Scott Huettel, Chair, Grand Ballroom B/C

4

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Keynote
Anjan Chatterjee, M.D.
Elliott Professor and Chief of Neurology at Pennsylvania Hospital

Keynote Address, Open to the Public
Saturday, March 28, 2:00-3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom

The neuroscience of aesthetics and art
What can neuroscience possibly tell us about aesthetics and art? In this talk,
I will offer a framework from which a neuroscientist might decompose
aesthetic experiences. I will discuss findings from neurology and cognitive
neuroscience that reveal neural structures and networks engaged when we
respond to beauty and react to art. I will consider the uneasy relationship
between scientific aesthetics and the humanities, dispel some critiques, and
acknowledge specific limitations of neuroaesthetics. Finally, informed by
our understanding of the neural underpinnings of art, I will speculate about
its evolution. Previous debates about whether art-making and appreciation
represent an instinct or an epiphenomenon of other evolved capacities are
probably not well-framed. I offer a third way to think about why we are now
– and perhaps have always been – surrounded by these mysterious objects
that we call art.

Biography
Anjan Chatterjee, MD, is the Elliott Professor and Chief of Neurology at Pennsylvania Hospital. He is a member of the
Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and the Center for Neuroscience and Society at the University of Pennsylvania. He is
or has served on the editorial boards of: Empirical Studies of the Arts, Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, Behavioural
Neurology, Neuropsychology, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, European Neurology, The Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, American Journal of Bioethics: Neuroscience, Brain Science, and Policy Studies in Ethics, Law
and Technology. In 2002, he was awarded the Norman Geschwind Prize in Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology by the
American Academy of Neurology. He is a past-President of the International Association of Empirical Aesthetics and the
President of the Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology Society. His neurology practice focuses on patients with cognitive
disorders. His research focuses on spatial cognition, language, ethics, and aesthetics. He is author of The Aesthetic Brain:
How we Evolved to Desire Beauty and enjoy Art (Oxford, 2014), has published over 150 peer-reviewed papers and co-edited Neuroethics in Practice: Medicine, Mind, and Society and The Roots of Cognitive Neuroscience: Behavioral Neurology
and Neuropsychology.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

5

George A. Miller Prize
Congratulations to Dr. Patricia Kuhl for About the George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive
Neuroscience
being awarded this honor!
Dr. Kuhl will accept this prestigious award and deliver
her lecture on Sunday, March 29, 2015, 5:30-6:30 pm, in the
Grand Ballroom.

The Neurogenetics of Language
Patricia Kuhl
Co-Director, Institute for Learning & Brain Sciences
Director, NSF Science of Learning Center (The LIFE Center)
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
In
neuroimaging
studies using structural
(diffusion
weighted magnetic
resonance imaging
or DW-MRI) and
functional (magnetoencephalography or
MEG) imaging, my
laboratory has produced data on the
neural connectivity
that underlies language processing, as
well as electrophysiological measures of
language functioning during various
levels of language processing (e.g., phonemic, lexical, or
sentential). Taken early in development, electrophysiological measures or “biomarkers” have been shown to predict
future language performance in neurotypical children as
well as children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD).
Work in my laboratory is now combining these neuroimaging approaches with genetic sequencing, allowing us to
understand the genetic contributions to language learning.
In this talk, I will describe ongoing work in which we use
neuroimaging and genetic sequencing to account for individuals’ ability to learn a second language. This work lends
support to a theoretical model whose main tenet is that language learning involves domain general cognitive and social
skills. This model is advancing as new data contribute to our
understanding of the neurogenetics of language.

6

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

The George A. Miller Prize in Cognitive Neuroscience was established in 1995 by the Cognitive Neuroscience Society to honor the
innovative scholarship of George A. Miller, whose many theoretical advances has so greatly influenced the discipline of cognitive
neuroscience. The first ten years of the prize were funded by generous support from the James S. McDonnell Foundation.
The Prize is awarded to the nominee whose career is characterized
by distinguished and sustained scholarship and research at the
cutting-edge of their discipline and that has in the past, or has the
potential in the future, to revolutionize cognitive neuroscience.
Extraordinary innovation and high impact on international scientific thinking should be a hallmark of the recipient’s work.
Each year a call for nominations for the George A. Miller Prize is
made to the membership of the society. The recipient of the prize
attends the annual meeting of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society
and delivers the George A. Miller lecture.

Previous Winners of the George A. Miller
Lectureship
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995

Jon Kaas, Ph.D., Vanderbilt University
Fred H. Gage, The Salk Institute
Eve Marder, Ph.D., Brandeis University
Mortimer Mishkin, Ph.D., NIMH
Steven Pinker, Ph.D., Harvard University
Marcus Raichle, Ph.D., Washington University School of Medicine
Anne Treisman, Ph.D., Princeton University
Joaquin M. Fuster, Ph.D.,
University of California Los Angeles
Steven A. Hillyard, Ph.D.,
University of California San Diego
Leslie Ungerleider, Ph.D., National
Institute of Mental Health
Michael Posner, Ph.D., University of Oregon
Michael Gazzaniga, Ph.D., Dartmouth College
Daniel Kahneman, Ph.D., Princeton University
William Newsome, Ph.D., Stanford University
Patricia Churchland, Ph.D.,
University of California, San Diego
Giacommo Rizzolatti, Ph.D.,
University of Parma, Italy
Susan Carey, Ph.D., New York University
Roger Shepard, Ph.D., Stanford University
David Premack, Ph.D., CNRS, France
David H. Hubel, Ph.D., Harvard Medical School

Distinguished Career
Contributions Award
Congratulations to Dr. Marta Kutas for
being awarded this honor!

about the functional role of the visual system in accessing
knowledge about an object from its name.

Dr. Kutas, will accept this prestigious award and deliver her
lecture on Saturday, March 28, 2015, 5:30 – 6:30 pm, in the
Grand Ballroom.

Brain brain please don’t go away
And do come again each and every day
Please help me find the right connection
That missing link to my mind to help instruct me
On how I think (for I think I do), upon reflection.
Nu? How it is my neural and body cells construct
What I see, what I hear
What I think, and what I fear
but dare not or care not to reveal in utterances aloud.
yet have routinely allowed to be read
from sensors bound to my head
Electrical and magnetic
-- empirically prophetic.

45 years of Cognitive Electrophysiology:
Neither just psychology nor just the brain
but the visible electrical interface between
the twain
Marta Kutas, MD
Distinguished Professor and Chair, Cognitive Science and
Distinguished Adjunct Professor of Neurosciences, and
Director of the Center for Research in Language, University of
California, San Diego
I’ve spent my scientific life demonstrating that event related
brain
potentials
(ERPs) – warts and
all - are temporally
exquisite
instruments for investigating what the brain
does – loosely, the
mind. ERPs are effective
instruments
because they are
continuous
and
instantaneous reflections of brain activity
(neuronal communication) which have
been proven systematically sensitive to sensory, motor, and
psychological variables. Moreover, after careful study in
their own right, ERPs in known paradigms, can offer opportunities for looking at what the brain considers qualitatively
similar or just quantitatively different and by when, at brain
activity that may or may not lead to overt behavior, as well
as at hypothetical psychological processes that may not otherwise be readily accessible. I was smitten with ERPs from
the beginning; others have warmed up more slowly, if at all.
I plan to share aspects of my scientific journey: P3 latency
and mental chronometry, RP and specific movement preparation, N400, meaning and modularity, the nogo N200 and
seriality of language production, and what ERP data say

A scientific refrain

About the Distinguished Career
Contributions Award
The Distinguished Career Contributions (DCC) award
honors senior cognitive neuroscientists for their distinguished career, leadership and mentoring in the field of
cognitive neuroscience. The recipient of this prize gives a
lecture at our annual meeting.

Previous Winners of the Distinguished
Career Contributions Award
2014

Marsel Mesulam, M.D., Northwestern University

2013

Robert T. Knight, University of California, Berkeley

2012

Morris Moscovitch, University of Toronto

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

7

Young Investigator Award
Congratulations to the 2015 Young
Investigator Award Winners

Do humans make good decisions?

Donna Rose Addis, Ph.D., University of Auckland,
New Zealand

University of Oxford

Christopher Summerfield, Ph.D., University of Oxford
YIA special lectures take place on Sunday, March 29,
1:30 –2:30 pm, in Grand Ballroom A.
The purpose of the awards is to recognize outstanding contributions by scientists early in their careers. Two awardees,
one male and one female, are named by the Awards Committee, and are honored at the CNS annual meeting. Each
award includes $500 US to be used by the winners toward
travel costs to the meeting, or for any other purpose.

Constructive Episodic Simulation of Future
Events
Donna Rose Addis, Ph.D.
University of Auckland, New Zealand
Humans spend a great
deal of their time thinking about their future
activities. In particular,
we can draw upon information stored in episodic memory to construct
detailed
simulations
about
upcoming
events.
Future simulations have
adaptive value, enhancing wellbeing, problem
solving and decision
making. However, if
these simulations are to
guide and enhance our future behaviour, it is critical that
future events are not only sufficiently detailed but also successfully encoded into memory. In this talk, I will discuss
recent behavioural and neuroimaging studies from my laboratory examining how constructive episodic memory processes (supported by the hippocampus and associated networks) support the simulation of detailed future events, as
well as the factors that influence the encoding of simulations.

8

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Christopher Summerfield, Ph.D.
Human performance on
perceptual classification
tasks approaches that of
an ideal observer, but
economic decisions are
often inconsistent and
intransitive, with preferences reversing according to the local context. I
will discuss the view
that suboptimal choices
may result from the
"efficient" coding of
decision-relevant information, a strategy that
allows expected inputs
to be processed with higher gain than unexpected inputs.
Efficient coding leads to 'robust' decisions that depart from
optimality but maximise the information transmitted by a
limited-capacity system in a rapidly-changing world. I will
consider recent work from my lab and elsewhere showing
that when perceptual environments are variable or volatile,
perceptual decisions exhibit the same suboptimal context-dependence as economic choices, and we propose a
general computational framework that accounts for findings
across the two domains.

Special Events
NIH Funding: Training and Research
Grant Opportunities

Federal Funding Opportunities at the
National Science Foundation

Sunday, March 29, 2:30-3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom A

Monday, March 30, 12:00-1:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B/C

This presentation will highlight current federal training,
career development, and research funding opportunities
available to CNS investigators. Program Directors representing the NIH will present an overview of relevant funding opportunities, as well as a brief overview of the grant
application, review, and funding processes, providing hints
for successful grant writing along the way. Come learn how
to advance your research with federal support!

Dr. Alumit Ishai, Director of the Cognitive Neuroscience
Program, will present an overview of current federal funding opportunities for Cognitive Neuroscientists at NSF, the
grant application, review and funding processes, and provide hints for successful grant writing along the way. Come
learn how to advance your research with federal support!

Speakers: Kathy Mann Koepke, NICHD/NIH, Lisa Freund,
NICHD/NIH
Panelists: Kathy Mann Koepke (NICHD), Lisa Freund
(NICHD), Steve Grant (NICHD), Aleksandra Vicentic
(NIMH), Molly Wagster (NIA)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society
Student Association Student Social
Night
Sunday, March 29, 7:00 pm, Meet in Hyatt Regency Reception
Area
Come and join us for the annual CNSSA Student Social
Night, Sunday, March 29th, after the George A. Miller Prize
Lecture. We will meet at 7:00 in the conference hotel reception area (look for signs), and walk out to a nearby bar/
restaurant around 7:15. There will be no cover charge and
light snacks will be provided at the restaurant (cash bar).
This event is open to all students and post docs of the Cognitive Neuroscience Society.
More information will be posted on the Cognitive Neuroscience Society Student Association Facebook page (http://
www.facebook.com/CNSStudentAssociation). We look forward to meeting you!

Speaker: Alumit Ishai, Director, NSF Cognitive Neuroscience Program

Journal Publishing Workshop: How to
peer review a paper
Tuesday, March 31, 12:00 – 1:00 pm, Grand Ballroom B/C
This workshop will cover the purpose of peer review, the
steps in the peer review process, why you should review,
tips on how to review a paper, tips on how to write comments to Editors and authors, what oversight a reviewer
provides, and what criteria a reviewer needs for assessment.
There will be a couple of short presentations followed by
Q&A and a panel discussion.
Speakers: Michael Rugg (Editor-in-Chief of Neuropsychologia), Toby Charkin (Elsevier)
Panelists: Marie Banich (Editor-in-Chief of Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience), Sarah-Jayne Blakemore
(Editor-in-Chief of Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience),
Mark D’Esposito (Editor-in-Chief of Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience), Cindy Lustig (Editor-in-Chief of Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences), Patti Reuter-Lorenz (Section Editor of Neuropsychologia), Michael Rugg (Editor-inChief of Neuropsychologia)

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

9

Data Blitz
Data Blitz Sessions
A Data Blitz is a series of 5-minute talks, each covering just a
bite-sized bit of research. It will offer a fast-paced overview
of some of the most exciting research presented at this year’s
poster sessions.

Data Blitz Session 1
Sunday, March 29, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom B/C

Talk 1: DEVELOPMENTAL PROSOPAGNOSIA (DP) IS BEST
EXPLAINED AS A DEFICIT IN DETECTING FACIAL DISTINCTIVENESS: THE DISTINCTIVENESS HYPOTHESIS OF DP. Edwin
Burns1, Jeremy Tree1, Christoph Weidemann1; 1Swansea University

Talk 2: THE MODULATION OF CLASSICALLY CONDITIONED FEAR
GENERALIZATION WITH D-CYCLOSERINE: AN FMRI STUDY Tori
Espensen-Sturges1, Alicia Kielbasa1, Philip Burton1, Kathryn
Cullen1, Shmuel Lissek1; 1University of Minnesota

Talk 3: FOOD-CUE INHIBITORY TRAINING REDUCES REWARD
REACTIVITY AND EATING URGES Pin-Hao A. Chen1, Richard B.
Lopez1, William M. Kelley1, Mary DiGeronimo1, Todd F. Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College

Talk 4: HIGH ROAD OR LOW ROAD? DISSECTING THE CONTRIBUTION OF CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL VISUAL PATHWAYS TO
THREAT ENCODING IN AN AVERSIVE CONDITIONING STUDY Yuqi
You1, Wen Li1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison

Talk 5: PRESERVED SYNTACTIC PROCESSING AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GREY MATTER INTEGRITY IN THE CAM-CAN
COHORT Karen L. Campbell1, . Cam-CAN2, Lorraine K. Tyler1;
1

University of Cambridge, 2Cambridge Centre for Ageing and
Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), University of Cambridge and MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge

Talk 6: PANTOMIMING OBJECT USE DECOUPLES FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN TEMPORAL AND PARIETAL TOOL-SELECTIVE AREAS Frank E. Garcea1,2, Bradford Z. Mahon1,2,3;
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of
Rochester, 2Center for Visual Science, University of Rochester,
3
Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester Medical
Center

Talk 7: LINKING GENES, BRAIN, AND BEHAVIOR IN A STUDY OF
SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING Ping Mamiya1, Todd Richard1,
Jeff Stevenson1, Evan Eichler1, Patricia Kuhl1; 1University of
Washington

Talk 8: COMPARING SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS OF ANIMALS AS INFERRED FROM BRAIN READING STUDIES VERSUS
BEHAVIORAL STUDIES: THEMATIC AND TAXONOMIC ORGANIZATION Andrew Bauer1, Charles Kemp1, Marcel Just1; 1Carnegie
Mellon University

10

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Talk 9: PREDICTING COGNITIVE DECLINE IN THE ELDERLY FROM
500+ HETEROGENEOUS BIOMARKERS USING MACHINE LEARNING Sarah K. Madsen1, Greg Ver Steeg2, Adam Mezher1, Neda
Neda Jahanshad1, Talia N. Nir1, Xue Hua1, Boris A. Gutman1,
Aram Galstyan2, Paul M. Thompson1; 1Imaging Genetics Center,
USC, 2USC Information Sciences Institute

Talk 10: LOCAL AND DISTRIBUTED EFFECTS OF TARGETED
NONINVASIVE STIMULATION OF THE HIPPOCAMPAL SYSTEM
ON RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS Jane Wang1, Joel
Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine

Talk 11: BLOCKING GAP JUNCTIONS DURING SLEEP IMPAIRS
DECLARATIVE MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN HUMANS Gordon
B. Feld1, Andreas Fritsche1, Jan Born1, Manfred Hallschmid1;
University of Tuebingen, Germany

1

Talk 12: THE UPS AND DOWNS OF REPEATED STUDY: AN FMRI
INVESTIGATION OF COMPETITIVE MEMORY INTERFERENCE
Zachariah Reagh4, Elizabeth Murray4, Michael Yassa4; 1Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, 2Institute for Memory
Impairments and Neurological Disorders, 3Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 4University of California,
Irvine

Talk 13: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HIPPOCAMPAL VISCOELASTICITY AND RELATIONAL MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN
HEALTHY YOUNG ADULTS: A MAGNETIC RESONANCE ELASTOGRAPHY STUDY Hillary Schwarb1, Curtis L. Johnson1, Matthew D.
J. McGarry2, Neal J. Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College

Talk 14: ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AT RETRIEVAL INCREASES EPISODIC RECOLLECTION ACCURACY Stephen Gray1, Geoffrey Brookshire1,
Daniel Casasanto1, David Gallo1; 1The University of Chicago

Talk 15: MEMORY AS DECISION-MAKING: THE SUCCESSFUL RETRIEVAL EFFECT TELLS US ALMOST NOTHING ABOUT
MEMORY ACCURACY Tyler Santander1, Brian A. Lopez2, Misty
Schubert2, Craig Bennett2, Michael B. Miller2; 1University of Virginia, 2University of California, Santa Barbara

2015 Annual Meeting

Data Blitz

Data Blitz Session 2
Tuesday, March 31, 10:00 am - 12:00 pm, Bay View Room

Talk 1: QEEG OF PASSIVE MUSICAL PARADIGMS ASSAYS INTEGRATIVE CEREBRAL FUNCTION IN THE MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS
STATE Brian C. Fidali1, Mary M. Conte1, Daniel J. Thengone1,

tistical Computing Core, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, 4Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of
Health

Talk 10: PREDICTIVE VISUAL MOTION FACILITATES SPEECH
PERCEPTION David Brang1,2, Satoru Suzuki1, Vernon L Towle2,

Tanya J. Nauvel1, Nicholas D. Schiff1; 1Weill Cornell Medical
College

Sasha Wu2, James X Tao2, Marcia Grabowecky1; 1Northwestern
University, 2University of Chicago

Talk 2: ON THE FATE OF IRRELEVANT MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS IN VISUO-SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY: EVIDENCE
BY A RETRO-CUING PARADIGM Daniel Schneider1, Edmund

Talk 11: SPATIO-TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF THE LEXICAL SELECTION NETWORK IN SPEECH PRODUCTION: INSIGHTS FROM
ELECTROCORTICOGRAPHY Stephanie Ries1, Rummit Dhillon1,

Wascher1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment
and Human Factors

Weber1,2, Benjamin Peters3, Tim Hahn1, Christoph Bledowski3,
Christian J. Fiebach1,2; 1Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, 2IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt, Germany, 3Institute
of Medical Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany

Alex Clarke2, Kenneth Laxer3,4, Peter Weber3, Rachel Kuperman5, Kurtis Auguste4,5, Gerwin Schalk6, Josef Parvizi7, Nathan
Crone8, Nina Dronkers9, Robert Knight1; 1University of California, 2Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain, Department of
Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, 3California
Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco, 4University of California
San Francisco, 5Children’s Hospital and Research Center, Oakland, CA, 6New York State Department of Health, Wadsworth
Center, and Department of Neurology, Albany Medical College,
7
Stanford Human Intracranial Cognitive Electrophysiology
Program (SHICEP), Stanford University, 8Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 9VA
Northern California Health Care System and University of California, Davis

Talk 5: TYPICALITY SHARPENS OBJECT REPRESENTATIONS IN
OBJECT-SELECTIVE CORTEX Marius Cătălin Iordan1, Michelle R.

Talk 12: INVESTIGATING BODY PERCEPTION IN HEALTHY AND
EATING DISORDERED FEMALES. Katie Groves1, Steffan Ken-

Talk 3: THE REPRESENTATIONAL CAPACITY OF THE HUMAN PREFRONTAL CORTEX: A HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI STUDY Patricia
Shih1, David Badre1; 1Brown University

Talk 4: LOAD-DEPENDENT NEURAL PATTERNS WITHIN SUPERIOR INTRAPARIETAL CORTEX REFLECT THE DETERIORATION
OF PRECISION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Elena Galeano

Greene1, Diane M. Beck2, Fei-Fei Li1; 1Stanford University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Talk 6: PROBING BINOCULAR RIVALRY: PRE-STIMULUS ALPHA
DETERMINES WHETHER SUPPRESSED-EYE PROBES ELICIT A
SWITCH IN PERCEPTUAL DOMINANCE Brian A. Metzger1,2, Kyle
3

1,2

1,2

M. Mathewson , Monica Fabiani , Gabriele Gratton , Diane M.
Beck1,2; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Beckman
Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, 3University of
Alberta

Talk 7: HIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN THE PERCEPTUAL
JUDGEMENT OF ESCHER-LIKE IMPOSSIBLE SCENES. Danielle
M. Douglas1, Sathesan Thavabalasingam1, Zahraa Chorghay1,
Andy C. H. Lee1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research
Institute

Talk 8: A MULTIMODAL STUDY OF DISGUST IN THE ULTIMATUM
GAME Filippo Rossi1, Veerle van Son2, Ian Fasel3, Marian Bartlett1,3, Alan Sanfey2; 1Institute for Neural Computation, University of California, San Diego, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University, 3Emotient, Inc., San
Diego

nett1, Helge Gillmeister1; 1University of Essex

Talk 13: TASK-EVOKED BRAIN ACTIVITY AFTER NEGATIVE
INDUCTION PREDICTS ENHANCEMENT OF MEMORY FOR NEUTRAL MATERIAL Morenikeji Adebayo1,2, Joseph Andreano1,2,
Alexandra Touroutoglou1,2, Bradford Dickerson1,2, Lisa Feldman
Barrett1,2,3; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Massachusetts General
Hospital, 3Northeastern University

Talk 14: THE EFFECTS OF OXYTOCIN ON PREFERRED INTERPERSONAL SPACE: A PHARMACOLOGICAL NEUROIMAGING STUDY
Daniela Cohen1, Anat Perry1, Gadi Gilam2,3, Naama Mayseless1,
Talma Hendler2,3, Simone Shamay-Tsoory1; 1University of Haifa,
2
Sagol School Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, 3Functional
Brain Center, Wohl Institute for Advanced Imaging, Tel Aviv
Sourasky MedicalCenter

Talk 15: SPECIFIC HYPOACTIVATION OF RIGHT TEMPORO-PARIETAL JUNCTION IN AUTISM AT THE SOCIALLY AWKWARD
MOMENTS OF A SITCOM Peter C. Pantelis1, Lisa Byrge1, J.
Michael Tyszka2, Ralph Adolphs2, Daniel P. Kennedy1; 1Indiana
University-Bloomington, 2California Institute of Technology

Talk 9: SHIFTS IN CONNECTIVITY DURING PROCEDURAL LEARNING AFTER MOTOR CORTEX INHIBITION Leonora Wilkinson1,
Adam Steel1, Sunbin Song2, Devin Bageac1, Kris Knutson1, Ziad
S. Saad3, Steven J. Gotts4, Eric M. Wassermann1; 1Behavioral
Neurology Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, 2Human Cortical Physiology Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 3Scientific and Sta-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

11

General Information
Abstracts
Poster abstracts can be found in the printed program and in
the PDF version which is downloadable from www.cogneurosociety.org.

Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Break, 3:00 – 3:30 pm, Exhibit Hall
Tuesday, March 31
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall

ATM
An ATM is located on the Atrium level of the hotel for your
convenience.

Audiovisual Equipment for Talks
LCD projectors (e.g., for PowerPoint presentations) will be
provided in all rooms where spoken sessions are scheduled;
however, computers will NOT be provided. Presenters must
bring their own computers and set them up BEFORE the
start of the session in which they are presenting. Speakers
are requested to bring their own dongle. Facilities will be
provided to allow several computers to be connected to the
LCD projector in a room. Presenters are strongly encouraged
to arrive in their scheduled symposium room a minimum of
30 minutes before their talks so that they know how to set
up their equipment.

Baggage Check
The Bell Desk - Assistance with luggage, packages and other
carry-on's, is located with the Concierge, next to the front
desk on the Atrium level.

Business Center
The Business Center is located on the Bay Level adjacent
to the Drumm Street windows. The following services are
available: Copy Services, Facsimile Services, On-Site Computers, Internet Access, Typing Services, and Shipping
Services (UPS and FedEx). After staffed hours, the business
center can be accessed with your room key to access computers with Internet and printing capabilities

Catering
Catering will be available during the conference and is
included in the registration fee. Please refer to the table
below for the catering times.
Saturday, March 28
Coffee Break, 3:30 – 4:00 pm, Exhibit Hall
Welcome Reception, 6:30 – 7:30 pm, Atrium
Sunday, March 29
Continental Breakfast, 8:00 – 8:30 am, Exhibit Hall
Coffee Break, 3:30 – 4:00 pm, Exhibit Hall

12

Monday, March 30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Certificate of Attendance
To receive a Certificate of Attendance please visit the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco
Hyatt Regency Hotel. If you require any changes, we will
be happy to email/mail a copy after the meeting. See also
Receipts.

Chair People
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
Persons chairing sessions are asked to keep the talks on time.

Contact Us
To contact us onsite, visit the Registration Counter on the
Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel
or send an email to meeting@cogneurosociety.org We will
respond to your email at our soonest opportunity.

Code of Conduct
The Cognitive Neuroscience Society is committed to providing a safe and professional environment during our
annual meeting. All CNS members are expected to conduct
themselves in a business-like and professional manner. It
is unlawful to harass a person or employee because of that
person’s sex or race. Harassment is defined by hostile or
offensive behavior towards another.

Disclaimer
The Program Committee reserves the right to change the
meeting program at any time without notice. Please note
this program is correct at time of print.

Drink Tickets
Each Attendee will receive one drink ticket; it can be
redeemed for an alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverage at the
Welcome Reception on Saturday. Lost drink tickets will not
be replaced.

Exhibits
The conference exhibits are located in Pacific Concourse
of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. Also located in

2015 Annual Meeting

General Information

this room are posters and catering. Exhibits are open to all
attendees at the following times:
Saturday, March 28
Sunday, March 29
Monday, March 30
Tuesday, March 31

3:30 – 5:30 pm
8:00 am – 5:30 pm
8:00 – 10:00 am*
1:30 - 7:30 pm
8:00 am – 12:00 pm

*Exhbit booths are closed Monday, 10:00 am to 1:30 pm, but
the Exhibit Hall is open all day.

Facebook
Find us on Facebook search for “Cognitive Neuroscience
Society” and like us!

Hotel
The San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel is our exclusive
Hotel for the CNS 2015 Annual Meeting and where all CNS
2015 meeting events will be held. Hyatt Regency San Francisco, 5 Embarcadero Center, San Francisco CA 94111.

Hotel Restaurants

Saturday, March 28
Sunday, March 29
Monday, March 30
Tuesday, March 31

11:00 am – 5:00 pm
7:30 am – 4:30 pm
8:00 am – 7:30 pm
8:00 am – 12:30 pm

Message Center
Messages for meeting registrants can be left and retrieved
at the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San
Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. A bulletin board will be
available for announcements and job postings.

Mobile Phones
Attendees are asked to silence their mobile phones when in
sessions.

Name Badges
The San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel and Convention
Center is open to public access. For security purposes,
attendees, speakers and exhibitors are asked to wear their
name badges to all sessions and social functions.

Eclipse Restaurant & Lounge. Whether you are in the mood
for quick refreshment or a full meal, the culinary offerings at
Eclipse will satiate you with an unforgettable interpretation
of global dining.

Entrance into sessions is restricted to registered attendees
only. Entrance to the Exhibition will be limited to badge
holders only. If you misplace your name badge, please go
to the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San
Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel for a replacement.

Internet Access

Parking

CNS attendees will receive complimentary wireless Internet
in their guest room, when reserved within the CNS block
and before March 4, 2015.

The San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel offers secured and
covered Valet parking. Parking rates are currently $66.00/24
hour for hotel guests with in and out privileges or $70.00/24
hour for non-guests. (Please note this information was correct at time of print.)

Free Internet terminals are located in the Ballroom Foyer
near the CNS Registration Desk. Internet terminals are
available during the meeting registration hours on Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday when not needed for
onsite registration. See Onsite Meeting Registration.

LinkedIn
Join our group on LinkedIn search “Cognitive Neuroscience
Society (CNS)”.

Phone Charging Station
There will be a small phone charging station located at the
Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel.

Photo Disclaimer

The meeting Lost and Found is located at the Registration
Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt
Regency Hotel.

Registration and attendance at, or participation in, the Cognitive Neuroscience Society meetings and other activities
constitute an agreement by the registrant/attendee to CNS’s
use and distribution (both now and in the future) of the registrant's or attendee's image in photographs of such events
and activities.

Member Services

Poster Sessions

The member services desk is located at the Registration
Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San Francisco Hyatt
Regency Hotel. The member services desk will be open at
the following times:

Poster sessions are scheduled on Saturday, March 28,
Sunday, March 29, Monday, March 30, and Tuesday,
March 31. The presenting author must be present during
the assigned session and other authors may be present to
answer questions. The poster sessions are in the Pacific
Concourse Exhibit Hall of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency

Lost & Found

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

13

General Information

2015 Annual Meeting

Hotel. Badges are required at all times. Do not leave personal items in the poster room.

Printed Program
One copy of the printed program is available to each
attendee. If you would like a second copy please check in
at the Registration Counter on the Ballroom floor of the San
Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel on the last day of the event.
Every effort has been made to produce an accurate program.
If you are presenting at the conference, please confirm your
presentation times as listed in this program. Attendees also
have the option to view the program by downloading it
from our website.

Smoking
Smoking is not permitted in or outside any of the meeting
rooms or the exhibition hall.

Speakers
All speakers must register and wear name badge to present.
Please ensure that you are available in your presentation
room at least thirty minutes before the start of the session.
See also Audiovisual equipment for Talks.

Transportation

Receipts

Taxis - There is a taxis stand at the front of the Hotel. A Taxi
to or from SFO is about 20-30 minutes and is approximately
$50-55.

You received two receipts via email, one at the time of purchase and a second with your registration confirmation.
Please email the registration desk if you require an additional copy. See also Certificate of Attendance.

BART (Bay Area Rapid Transit) -Please visit www.bart.gov
for fares and schedules. Station is located within steps of the
hotel's front entrance. Approximate one-way fare from San
Francisco International Airport $8.65 each way.

Receptions

Lorrie's Shuttle - Offers service to the Hyatt Regency San
Francisco. Shuttles depart every 20 minutes. Board shuttles
just outside of the luggage carousels on the lower level of
SFO. Fare is $17 from the airport to the hotel.

The Welcome Reception will be held in the Atrium, from
6:30-7:30 pm on Saturday, March 28, directly following the
Distinguished Career Contributions in Cognitive Neuroscience Lecture.

Registration
The Registration Counter is located on the Ballroom floor
of the San Francisco Hyatt Regency Hotel. The Registration
Counter will be open at the following times:
Saturday, March 28
Sunday, March 29
Monday, March 30
Tuesday, March 31

11:00 am – 7:00 pm
7:30 am – 6:30 pm
8:00 am – 7:30 pm
8:00 am – 3:30 pm

*Fares subject to change without notice.

Twitter
Follow CNS Annual Meeting (@CNSmtg). Our Hashtag this
year is #CNS2015

Website
http://www.cogneurosociety.org/annual-meeting/

GSA/PFA Awards
Congratulations to the 2015 winners of the Graduate Student Awards and the Post-Doctoral Fellow Awards.
Each winner receives a monetary stipend to cover conference travel expenses.

Graduate Student Award Winners

Post-Doctoral Fellow Award Winners

Shirpa Kanjlia, Johns Hopkins University

Fanny Lachat, Aalto University, Finland

David W. Sutterer, University of Oregon

Daniel Schneider, Leibniz Research Centre for
Working Environment and Human Factors

Atsushi Kikumoto, University of Oregon
Marius Cătălin Iordan, Stanford University
Andrew Bauer, Carnegie Mellon University
Sean O'Bryan, Texas Tech University
Tori Espensen-Sturges, University of Minnesota

Filippo Rossi, University of California, San Diego
Thackery I. Brown, Stanford University
Lindsay Nagamatsu, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign
Ping Mamiya, University of Washington
Carina de Klerk, University of London

14

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Exhibits
Exhibitors

Exhibit Hours

Visit our exhibitors in the Exhibit Hall located in the Pacific
Concourse, one floor down from the CNS Registration
Desk. Take the stairs outside the Market Street Foyer on the
ground floor.

Exhibits are open to all attendees during these hours:

ANT North America
BIOPAC Systems, Inc.
Brain Vision LLC
Cambridge Cognition
Cedrus Corporation
Compumedics Neuroscan
Cortech Solutions, Inc.
Current Designs, Inc.
Electrical Geodesics, Inc.
Lumos Labs
Neuralynx, Inc.
NITRC: Neuroimaging Informatics Tools
and Resources Clearinghouse
Psychology Press
Psychology Software Tools
Rogue Research, Inc
Rogue Resolutions Ltd.
Royal Society Publishing
Sinauer Associates, Inc.
Smart Eye AB
SR Research, Ltd.
The Black Box Toolkit
The MIT Press
TMS International

Saturday
Sunday
Monday
Tuesday

3:30 – 5:30 pm
8:00 am – 5:30 pm*
8:00 am – 10:00 am, 1:30 – 7:30 pm**
8:00 am – 12:00 pm

** Exhibits are closed from 10:00 am - 1:30 pm on Monday.

*Join Us at the Exhibit Expo
Join us Sunday for a special Exhibit Expo from 12:00 –
1:30 pm. Explore all that CNS's exhibitors have to offer
during this exclusive event dedicated to providing attendees new ideas, innovative technologies, and useful products.
No other meeting events or sessions are scheduled during
this exhibits-only period.

SAVE THE DATE

CNS 2016
Annual Meeting
April 2-5, 2016
Hilton New York Hotel
New York City

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

15

Invited-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

The renaissance of EEG: An old dog teaching us new tricks

Monday March 30

3:30 - 5:30 pm

Grand Ballroom B/C

2

The Changing Brain—Insights from Lifespan Cognitive Neuroscience

Tuesday March 31

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Grand Ballroom A

3

Decisions, Emotion, the Self, and Medial Prefrontal Cortex

Tuesday March 31

1:30 - 3:30 pm

Grand Ballroom B/C

Invited Symposium Session 1
THE RENAISSANCE OF EEG: AN OLD DOG
TEACHING US NEW TRICKS
Monday, March 30, 3:30 - 5:30 pm, Grand Ballroom B/C
Chair: Micah Murray, University Hospital Center and University of
Lausanne, Center for Biomedical Imaging, Vanderbilt University
Speakers: Christoph Michel, Micah Murray, Charles Schroeder,
José del Millán
This symposium highlights how the humble EEG has proven
itself a remarkably information-rich, versatile, accessible,
and cost-effective neuroimaging method. However, many
researchers using EEG fail to capitalize on the breadth of the
technique’s full capabilities. The goal of this symposium is
therefore to present a selection of key and avant-garde uses
of EEG in cognitive, clinical, and trans-species neuroscience
presented in a tutorial style. The first two talks will provide
evidence for EEG being a true neuroimaging method. The
other two talks will show the richness of information available from EEG that comes with applications of advances in
signal processing. Christoph Michel will explain the basics
of spatio-temporal analysis of multichannel EEG and will
demonstrate the spatial precision of EEG source imaging.
Micah Murray will detail how many of the long-assumed
shortcomings of event-related potential (ERP) analysis
can be overcome by combining high-density recordings
with data-driven, multivariate analyses that provide direct
neurophysiologic interpretability. Charles Schroeder will
demonstrate how oscillatory brain dynamics provide critical
insights into quintessential mechanisms of signal transmission within and between brain regions that in turn reveal the
fundamental principles of attentional control over sensation
and action. Finally, José Millán will demonstrate the critical
insights provided by advanced EEG signal analysis in the
continued development of neurotechnologies and neuroprostheses.

TALK 1: TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF LARGE-SCALE
NEURONAL NETWORKS STUDIED WITH EEG
Christoph Michel1; 1University of Geneva, Switzerland
This lecture will provide an overview on how to use the EEG
as a modern functional imaging method. It is based on the
recording of the electric potential field at the scalp surface
with multichannel recording devices. By properly sampling
16

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

and correctly analyzing this electric field, EEG can provide
reliable information about the neuronal activity in the brain
and the temporal dynamics of this activity in the millisecond range. Source localization based on high-density EEG
and individual head models reveal very high precision as
demonstrated in many clinical validation studies. Connectivity analyses in the source space reveal the dynamics of
information exchange within and between large-scale networks in the sub-second time range. The versatility of EEG
allows simultaneous recordings with other imaging methods (fMRI, TMS, NIRS, iEEG, MEG) and therefore allows
for a comprehensive understanding of the spatio-temporal
dynamics of brain networks on different time scales.

TALK 2: ELECTRICAL NEUROIMAGING OF EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS
Micah Murray1,2,3; 1University Hospital Center and University of
Lausanne, Switzerland, 2EEG Brain Mapping Core of the Center for
Biomedical Imaging, Switzerland, 3Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
This talk will provide a tutorial on the analyses of ERPs
within an electrical neuroimaging framework. Both the
rationale for as well as the implementation of this analysis framework are based on the reference-free information
available from high-density electrode montages that in turn
render statistical information concerning modulations in
response strength, latency, and topography both between
and within experimental conditions as well as across groups.
The electrical neuroimaging framework allows experimenters to glean additional information and neurophysiologic
interpretability beyond what is available from canonical
waveform analyses, while also surmounting many caveats
that often go overlooked. I will provide both a conceptual
and mathematical description of how each step of the analysis is carried out, what it yields, and how to interpret its
statistical outcome. The electrical neuroimaging framework
is intuitive, mathematically straightforward and can remove
much of the guesswork often confronting ERP researchers,
prompting a renaissance in the use of EEG in basic, clinical,
and translational research.

2015 Annual Meeting

TALK 3: WHY DO OSCILLATIONS MATTER?
Charles Schroeder1,2; 1The Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY,
USA, 2Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Neuroelectric oscillations reflect rhythmic fluctuations of
excitability in neuron ensembles distributed throughout
the brain. For many scientists, the question of whether they
matter is already moot. It is clear, for example, that: 1) the
ability of a sensory structure to transmit information from
a receptor surface to a central target is dramatically affected
by the oscillatory phase under which the peripheral input
arrives, 2) at a perceptual level, the ability to even “notice”
an event has a similar stimulus-phase dependence in key
brain regions, and 3) generation of a behavioral response
such as a button press, likewise depends on local oscillatory
phase in motor regions of the brain. I will begin by briefly
reviewing recent evidence along the above lines and then
discuss recent evidence on the cellular and circuit mechanisms that induce oscillatory synchrony within and between
brain regions. I will end with speculations about how we
can put this developing understanding to use in neuroprosthesis.

TALK 4: THE RISE OF NEUROPROSTHETICS: THE
PERCEPTION-ACTION CLOSED LOOP
José del Millán1; 1Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Switzerland
Future neuroprosthetics will be tightly coupled with the
user in such a way that the resulting system can replace
and restore impaired upper limb functions because they are
controlled by the same neural signals as their natural counterparts. However, robust and natural interaction of subjects
with sophisticated prostheses over long periods of time
remains a major challenge. To tackle this challenge we can get
inspiration from natural motor control, where goal-directed
behavior is dynamically modulated by perceptual feedback
resulting from executed actions. Current brain-machine
interfaces (BMI) partly emulate human motor control as they
decode cortical correlates of movement parameters —from
onset of a movement to directions to instantaneous velocity— in order to generate the sequence of movements for the
neuroprosthesis. A closer look, though, shows that motor
control results from the combined activity of the cerebral
cortex, subcortical areas and spinal cord. This hierarchical
organization supports the hypothesis that complex behaviors can be controlled using the low-dimensional output of
a BMI in conjunction with intelligent devices in charge to
perform low-level commands. A further component that
will facilitate intuitive and natural control of motor neuroprosthetics is the incorporation of rich multimodal feedback
and neural correlates of perceptual processes resulting from
this feedback. As in natural motor control, these sources of
information can dynamically modulate interaction.

Invited-Symposium Sessions

Invited Symposium Session 2
THE CHANGING BRAIN—INSIGHTS FROM
LIFESPAN COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Tuesday, March 31, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz, University of Michigan
Co-Chair: Michael D. Rugg, University of Texas at Dallas
Speakers: Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz, Lorraine K. Tyler, Michael D.
Rugg, Ulman Lindenberger
Over the last 25 years, cognitive neuroscience research has
greatly advanced our understanding of the aging mind and
brain, and provided important insights into neurocognitive function in young adults, and across the lifespan. The
speakers in this symposium will discuss their research on
executive function, language, memory, and plasticity, highlighting how research on the older brain can improve understanding of brain function more generally.

TALK 1: AGE-RELATED DECLINE AND COMPENSATION:
IMPLICATIONS FOR A LIFE SPAN APPROACH
Patricia A. Reuter-Lorenz1; 1Department of Psychology, University
of Michigan
Brain imaging has led to significant advances in identifying age-related neural alterations that underlie aspects of
cognitive decline in healthy older age. These methods have
also revealed age differences in brain function, especially
in the domain of executive control that may provide some
forms of compensation to maintain effective performance in
some cognitive domains. This talk will review key evidence
indicating aspects of decline related to the dedifferentiation
of representations, dysregulation of the default network,
dysfunction of medial temporal regions and prefrontal connectivity. Evidence for these potentially adverse effects of
aging will be considered in light of other findings of greater
bilateral activity and prefrontal recruitment that characterizes brain imaging results from at least some populations of
older adults and may suggest potential for compensation,
plasticity and capacity for neural reorganization into older
age. A new conceptual model is presented, the Scaffolding
Theory of Aging Cognition- Revised (Reuter-Lorenz & Park,
2014), which takes a lifespan approach to integrate evidence
for decline and compensation within a longitudinal framework that recognizes lifelong influences that can enrich or
diminish neural resources thereby shaping the likelihood of
successful cognitive aging.

TALK 2: LANGUAGE FUNCTION AND THE AGING BRAIN
Lorraine K. Tyler1; 1Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain
Normal healthy aging involves widespread brain changes
that are thought to lead to increasingly severe problems
with many everyday cognitive functions. However, despite
changes in brain structure, some cognitive functions – such
as language comprehension – are preserved across the adult
lifespan, raising the important question of what mechanisms enable preserved cognitive functions? Are they examples of particularly effective compensation? We address
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

17

Invited-Symposium Sessions

this question in the context of language comprehension, a
complex system that involves the rapid transformation of
speech input into a various different types of representation.
In spite of the multiple rapid computations involved, there
is little evidence that aging significantly impairs normal
language comprehension. Focusing on syntactic processing
during natural listening, we find no evidence for functional
compensation of the left hemisphere specialized syntax
network. While age-related decreases in grey matter are
associated with weakened connectivity within the syntax
network and increased interhemispheric connectivity elsewhere, these changes are related to poorer performance
and therefore are not evidence for successful compensation.
Where we do see functional compensation is during experimental paradigms that place additional cognitive demands
on the listener. Under these conditions, older listeners show
increased activation of domain-general (but not domain
specific) networks, which are associated with improved performance. Overall, this research suggests that in the context
of widespread age-related grey matter changes, preserved
syntactic comprehension depends on the residue of the
domain-specific language system and that this system does
not functionally reorganize. I will discuss these findings in
relation to current neurocognitive models of aging.

TALK 3: DISSOCIATING THE EFFECTS OF AGE AND
PERFORMANCE ON FUNCTIONAL BRAIN ACTIVITY: AN
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES APPROACH
Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at
Dallas
Performance in numerous cognitive domains declines with
increasing age. At all ages, however, there are marked individual differences in levels of performance, and there is considerable overlap in the performance of people at different
ages. In this presentation I will discuss how an individual
differences approach can be used to distinguish between age
effects on functional brain activity that reflect a direct influence of age on brain function or organization, and effects
that are a consequence of differences in mean performance
across age groups. This is an important distinction: while
the second of these classes of age differences sheds light on
the neural bases of individual differences in cognitive performance that generalize across the adult lifespan, the first
class provides insight into how brain function is impacted
by increasing age. Drawing on a large data set in which
fMRI was employed to identify neural correlates of successful associative encoding and recollection in groups of young
(18-30yrs), middle-aged (45-55yrs) and older (65-75yrs)
individuals, I will present evidence that both encodingand retrieval-related neural activity are robustly associated
with individual differences in memory performance. Most
of these neural measures demonstrated no age-related differences after across-participant differences in performance
were accounted for, although they remained correlated with
performance. Only a few measures - notably, encoding-related ‘deactivation’ - demonstrated age-related differences
that could not be accounted for by performance differences.
18

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

The implications of these findings for an understanding of
why episodic memory declines with age will be discussed.

TALK 4: EXPERIENCE-DEPENDENT PLASTICITY
IN ADULTHOOD: INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES,
MECHANISMS, AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Ulman Lindenberger1; 1Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max
Planck Institute for Human Development
Human cognitive aging differs between and is malleable
within individuals. In the absence of a strong genetic program, it is open to a host of hazards, such as vascular conditions, metabolic syndrome, and chronic stress, but also open
to protective and enhancing factors, such as experience-dependent cognitive plasticity. Across the entire human lifespan, stability and plasticity form a dynamic equilibrium,
with age-graded changes in set points. Longitudinal studies
suggest that leading an intellectually challenging, physically
active, and socially engaged life may mitigate losses and
consolidate gains, but need to be interpreted with caution,
as individuals are not randomly assigned to lifestyles. Interventions help to identify contexts and mechanisms of successful cognitive aging and give science and society a hint
about what would be possible if conditions were different.
Recent research on mechanisms regulating the onset and
termination of critical periods shows that plasticity itself is
plastic, and hence opens new avenues for cognitive interventions in adulthood.

2015 Annual Meeting

Invited Symposium Session 3
DECISIONS, EMOTION, THE SELF, AND MEDIAL
PREFRONTAL CORTEX
Tuesday, March 31, 1:30 - 3:30 pm, Grand Ballroom B/C
Chair: Scott Huettel, Duke University
Speakers: Scott Huettel, Lesley Fellows, Sarah-Jayne Blakemore,
Mauricio Delgado
Many sub-areas of cognitive neuroscience claim the medial
prefrontal cortex for their own. This large and cytoarchitectonically diverse region has been linked to a broad range of
functions: behavioral control, experience and regulation of
emotions, social cognition and the sense of self, and computing the value of actions. This symposium will examine
the medial prefrontal cortex from each of these perspectives
to identify common processes and organizational properties
that shed light on its function.

TALK 1: PARSING THE MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX:
VALUE AND CONTROL
Scott Huettel1; 1Duke University
Over the past decade, research on the brain mechanisms
underlying reward-based decision making has proceeded
rapidly – and often apace from new findings in cognitive
neuroscience. Yet, new insights about the computation of
value in the medial prefrontal cortex have broad relevance
for other areas of cognition, including emotion regulation,
memory, and social perception. I will review how medial
prefrontal cortex shapes decision making, describe recent
work connecting value-guided decision making to other
domains of cognition, and discuss key challenges for an
integrated perspective on medial prefrontal cortex function.

Invited-Symposium Sessions

TALK 3: DEVELOPMENT OF DORSOMEDIAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX IN ADOLESCENCE
Sarah-Jayne Blakemore1; 1University College London
Dorsomedial prefrontal cortex is a key region of the social
brain, that is, the network of brain regions involved in
understanding one’s own and other people’s mental states.
Several structural and functional MRI studies have shown
that dorsomedial prefrontal cortex develops in terms of
grey matter volume, and activity and functional connectivity during social cognition tasks, during the period of adolescence. Behavioural studies have also shown that social
decision-making and perspective taking are still developing
in adolescence. These findings are considered in relation to
the proposal that adolescence is a formative period for the
development of self identity and a sensitive period for social
processing.

TALK 4: THE FLEXIBLE CONTROL OF EMOTIONS BY THE
VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX
Mauricio Delgado1; 1Rutgers University, Newark
Emotion regulation is an adaptive process that allows for
the flexible control of emotional responses to promote better
decisions. Central to this process is the role of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) in interpreting the emotional meaning of events. Specifically, the vmPFC has been
involved in a) facilitating changes in the emotional meaning
of stimuli that predict negative outcomes and b) flexibly
interpreting negative outcomes that influence behavior
maladaptively. This talk will focus on the putative role of
the vmPFC in emotion-focused coping. Further, this will be
contrasted with an alternative mechanism for coping that
depends on neural structures such as the striatum to correct
behavior and avoid further negative outcomes.

TALK 2: MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS
TO DECISIONS, ERRORS, AND SELF-MONITORING:
EVIDENCE FROM HUMAN LESION STUDIES
Lesley Fellows1; 1Montreal Neurological Institute
Regions along the medial wall of the frontal lobe have been
linked to a dizzying array of behaviours, from basic aspects
of action monitoring and cognitive control, to complex social
and emotional responses. Studies of people with damage to
the medial frontal lobe can help to define the component
behavioural processes that rely critically on this region. I
will review lesion studies that argue for specific contributions of dorsal and ventromedial frontal regions to error
processing, learning to assign value to stimuli or actions,
and mediating the effects of attention on value updating in
decision-making. Finally, these findings will be related to
classical descriptions of “frontal” symptoms, such as apathy
and utilization behaviour.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

19

Mini-Symposium Sessions
#

Title

Date

Time

Location

1

What can be, or should be, the relationship between language and
neuroscience?

Sunday, March 29

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom A

2

Zooming-in on the hippocampus: Advances in high-resolution imaging in the context of cognitive aging and dementia

Sunday, March 29

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom B/C

3

Reasoning: Origins and Development

Sunday, March 29

10:00 am - Noon

Bay View Room

4

Cerebellar Contributions to Learning and Cognition

Monday, March 30

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom A

5

Disrupting the face perception network

Monday, March 30

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom B/C

6

Approaches to identify network connectivity in neuroimaging

Monday, March 30

10:00 am - Noon

Bay View Room

7

Interactions Between the Prefrontal Cortex and the Medial-Temporal
Lobes Supporting the Control of Memory Retrieval

Monday, March 30

3:30 - 5:30 pm

Grand Ballroom A

8

Temporal coordination of neuronal processes by cross-frequency
interactions

Tuesday March 31

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom A

9

Fresh perspectives on social perception: From functional specialization to connectivity

Tuesday March 31

10:00 am - Noon

Grand Ballroom B/C

Mini-Symposium Session 1
WHAT CAN BE, OR SHOULD BE, THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LANGUAGE AND NEUROSCIENCE?
Sunday, March 29, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Hanna Gauvin, Gent University
Speakers: David Poeppel, Sophie Scott, Fred Dick
The voluminous and fast-growing literature on language in
the brain suggests that our understanding of how linguistic
processes are computed by the brain is progressing by leaps
and bounds. However, many if not most such studies come
to the conclusion that ‘area x is involved in/responsible for
linguistic process y’. This situation is hardly unique to the
cognitive neuroscience of language, but clearly one we need
to progress from. The aim of this mini-symposium is to stimulate debate - and potentially even generate some answers
- about how we can leverage exciting new developments
in natural language processing, linguistic typology, speech
recognition, and other fields of linguistics to understand
how our brain allows us to develop and master this most
extraordinary, unique, yet ubiquitous human skill.

TALK 1: CORRELATIONAL, INTEGRATED, AND
EXPLANATORY NEUROSCIENCE OF LANGUAGE
David Poeppel1,2; 1New York University, 2Max Planck Institute
What would an integrated approach to language research
look like that connects theoretical, psycholinguistic, and
neurobiological domains of inquiry? To what extent is ‘uni-

20

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

fication’ (e.g. in the sense of Marr) possible across domains?
I discuss the outlines of a program of research at the center
of which lies the idea that computational/representational
(CR) theories of language must be used to investigate the
neurobiological (NB) foundations of language. Unlike most
approaches to the neuroscience of language - and borrowing
from arguments advanced by Gallistel for the case of spatial
navigation - I argue for a more ‘muscular’ cognitive science/
linguistics that takes a leading role (in epistemological terms)
in motivating neurobiological questions. Different ways
are considered in which CR and NB might be connected.
These are (1) a correlational way, in which NB computation
is correlated with the CR theory (i.e. business as usual); (2)
an integrated way, in which NB data provide crucial evidence for choosing among CR theories (this happens, but
rarely…); and (3) an explanatory way, in which properties
of the neurobiology explain in a causal, mechanistic sense
why a computational-representational theory is the way it is
(the aspirational goal). I examine various questions concerning the prospects for explanatory connections, in particular,
including to what extent it makes sense to say that NB could
be specialized for particular linguistic computations.

TALK 2: THE BRAIN DOESN'T CARE ABOUT YOUR
EXPERIMENT.
Sophie Scott1; 1University College London
Functional imaging has made tremendous leaps in our
understanding of the functional anatomy of the intact
human brain. Is this of importance to our understanding
of human language? Some have been skeptical, and others
more confident of the insights. In my talk, I will address

2015 Annual Meeting

some of the strengths and limitations of functional imaging
and neuroscientific perspectives. Great strengths of this
general approach is the ability to move beyond an uncritical dependence and interpretation on Wernicke’s area and
Broca’s area as explanatory constructs, and the possibilities
of using other neurobiological frameworks and theories to
inform linguistic perspectives. More problematic can be the
ways that we exploit this, with a very heavy reliance on the
kinds of experimental paradigms that are typically essential
when performing behavioural studies, but which can lead
to spurious patterns of activation, which are not essential
to the linguistic phenomena being studied, but which are
associated with the task itself. I also would suggest that we
have been historically fixated on more abstract aspects of
language processing in a way which may have significantly
underplayed the social and emotional significance of the
spoken or signed word, and I will use the example of speech
and voice as a way of demonstrating the effects of this.

TALK 3: LINGUISTICS AND COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE:
IT’S TIME TO TAKE DIVERSITY SERIOUSLY.
Fred Dick1; 1Birkbeck College, University of London
The marriage of cognitive neuroscience and linguistics has
been a long and productive one. But as with all relationships,
it’s easy to end up rehashing the same old routines and conversations if you don’t make new friends and try out new
approaches to old problems. In this regard, cognitive neuroscience can benefit from a more pluralistic and up-to-date
view of linguistic research. I’ll highlight some recent studies that have successfully used computational approaches
to natural language processing as a way to characterize
underlying neural representations, and will suggest some
ways we can move forward using such approaches. Such
detailed models can also give us a way to think about how ‘a
language brain’ might have evolved, and what it means for
neuroscientific theories of language when different brains
seem to accomplish very basic language tasks in quite different ways. Here, thinking developmentally will be crucial
to understand this ‘diversity of neural organization’, as well
as in testing the predictions of linguistic theories. I will highlight some studies on the slow and rather dramatic developmental changes of very basic language skills that suggest
that what seems ‘easy’ according to most linguistic theories
is actually something that takes the brain a very long time
to sort out to its own satisfaction. Finally, I will discuss how
recent work in learning and language evolution bear on a
fairly common assumption about language and the brain,
namely that the regularities and ‘rules’ that we can observe
in language are actually represented in the brain.

Mini-Symposium Sessions

Mini-Symposium Session 2
ZOOMING-IN ON THE HIPPOCAMPUS:
ADVANCES IN HIGH-RESOLUTION IMAGING
IN THE CONTEXT OF COGNITIVE AGING AND
DEMENTIA
Sunday, March 29, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom B/C
Chair: Naftali Raz, Wayne State University
Speakers: Susanne Mueller, Craig Stark, Geoffrey Kirchner,
Michael Yassa
Medial temporal lobe circuits play pivotal roles in fundamental cognitive processes and the hippocampal formation
is arguably the most researched constituent of the mammalian brain. However, the hippocampus is not a uniform
structure and its components or subfields differ dramatically
in their cytoarchitectonic, vascular and electrophysiological
properties and exhibit differential vulnerability to multiple
pathophysiological and neurotoxic factors. The cumulative record of studies in rodents reveals intricate mapping
of diverse cognitive operations on specific hippocampal
regions, but until recently investigations of similar brain-behavior associations in humans have been rare. Latest
advancements in non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) techniques allowed progressively finer resolution of
hippocampal regional structure and function thus providing cognitive neuroscientists with intriguing opportunities
to delve deeper into the neural basis of cognitive differences
and changes that accompany aging, development and neurological disease. In this symposium, we will survey the
latest developments in MR imaging of the hippocampal subfields, which include four compartments of Cornu ammonis
(CA1-CA4), the dentate gyrus, and the subiculum complex.
We will present findings pertaining to the role of distinct
subfields in specific aspects of episodic memory of healthy
adults and persons with cognitive deficits that are linked to
multiple pathophysiological and genetic causes.

TALK 1: INSIGHTS INTO NEUROANATOMICAL
CORRELATES OF EPISODIC MEMORY FROM LOCALIZED
EFFECTS OF CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
Susanne Mueller1; 1University of California at San Francisco
Vascular risk and cerebrovascular disease increase dramatically with age and are associated with differential decline
the hippocampus and its subfields. Thus, cerebrovascular disease presents a useful model for studying episodic
memory through investigation of memory deficits arising
from disease-related changes in hippocampal structure
and function in elderly subjects. In 150 subjects (range:
66-92 years) with and without mild cognitive impairment
due to cerebrovascular disease, we obtain high resolution
PD-weighted images of the hippocampus that we manual
parcellated to obtain subfield volumes from the anterior
third of the hippocampal body and entorhinal cortex. We
observed smaller CA1 volumes were smaller cognitively
impaired participants and were negatively associated with

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

21

Mini-Symposium Sessions

Framingham coronary risk score. Larger CA1-2 transition
zone volumes were associated with lower vascular risk.
Larger volume of CA1 was associated with better performance on verbal and non-verbal memory tasks but not with
an index of global cognition. Thus, vascular disease and vascular risk factors that have been shown to target areas CA1
and CA1-2 are linked to episodic memory performance and
may constitute a common substrate for physiological and
pathological memory impairment in the elderly.

TALK 2: DIFFERENTIAL ROLE OF HIPPOCAMPAL
SUBFIELDS AND HIPPOCAMPAL CONNECTIVITY IN
MEMORY
Craig Stark1; 1University of California at Irvine
The hippocampus has long been linked to declarative or
explicit forms of memory, but only recently computational
models and electrophysiological studies in rodents have
associated different memory functions with distinct hippocampal subregions. One particular function, ascribed to the
dentate gyrus, is a pattern separation. By transforming similar representations of similar events into discrete representations (pattern separation or orthogonalization), memories
can be formed rapidly without suffering high levels of interference. Our understanding of the hippocampus and its role
in various forms of memory (e.g., episodic memory, recollection, etc.) would be greatly enhanced if we could translate
these computational and rodent studies and provide experimental validation of these findings in humans. Here, I will
present data from high-resolution BOLD fMRI studies that
are consistent with differential computations across hippocampal subfields. I will further show how healthy aging is
associated with a disruption in hippocampal connectivity
that is, in turn, associated with alteration of subfield-level
activity and memory behavior tied to pattern separation and
the dentate gyrus.

TALK 3: LAMINAR ATROPHY IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS AND
MEMORY DEFICITS
Geoffrey Kirchner1; 1Stanford University School of Medicine
Hippocampal subregions exhibit selective vulnerability
to age and neurodegeneration. This selectivity is apparent
not only between subfields, but also between laminae, as
post-mortem tissue analysis reveals that the neurites in the
CA1 stratum radiatum / stratum lacunosum-moleculare
(SRLM) are among the first structures in the hippocampus
to exhibit neurofibrillary tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Using ultra-high field 7-Tesla MRI and 0.22 mm
in-plane resolution, we observed differential SRLM atrophy
among patients with AD dementia relative to age-matched
controls; among older versus younger cognitively-healthy
controls; and among carriers of the ApoE4 allele relative to
non-carriers. In patients with AD and amnestic mild cognitive impairment (a prodromal stage of AD), there is a robust
and specific correlation between the degree of SRLM atrophy and episodic memory performance, consistent with the
notion that loss of synaptic structures in this neuropil region
of the hippocampus relates to a core cognitive feature of AD.
22

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

SRLM atrophy reflects the burden of tau-related neuropathology, as measured by cerebrospinal fluid tau and phospho-tau levels. In summary, quantitative evaluation of hippocampal laminar structure yields important insights into
the selective vulnerability SRLM to aging and AD-related
neurodegeneration, and its close association with molecular
biomarkers and behavioral performance.

TALK 4: DISSECTING HIPPOCAMPAL COMPUTATIONS
AND PROCESSES: A TRANSLATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
USING HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI
Michael Yassa1, Zachariah Reagh1; 1University of California at
Irvine
There has been widespread interest recently in distinguishing the roles that particular hippocampal subfields play in
service of episodic memory storage. This is compounded
with the fact that subfield-specific patterns of pathology
are expressed in the context of various mental disorders
including, aging, AD, and depression. I will discuss our
recent work in (1) delineating the computational roles various hippocampal subfields play with a particular emphasis
on the dentate gyrus and CA3 regions, (2) the interactions
of these subfields with other medial temporal lobe regions
in the context of specific types of memory, (3) differential
vulnerability of hippocampal subfields to aging, AD, and
depression, and (4) using subfield-level MRI to derive novel
biomarkers for early prediction of disease and treatment
outcomes.

Mini-Symposium Session 3
REASONING: ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT
Sunday, March 29, 10:00 am - Noon, Bay View Room
Chair: Kathy Mann Koepke, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD)/NIH
Speakers: Aaron Blaisdell, Silvia Bunge, Ben Rottman, Daniel
Krawczyk
Despite great neuroscience advances, pursuit of the mechanisms underlying reasoning abilities has stalled. Without
clear models, universal definitions, or normative data on
which to build rich, heuristic theoretical models of reasoning, the search for clear neurobiological and genetic underpinnings has been slow. Understanding how reasoning
skills develop; identifying developmental challenges, sensitive periods, risks and key prevention, maintenance, and
remedial interventions have emerged as critical priorities.
Refining nomenclature, developing homologous cross-species measurements, identifying sophisticated analytic
methods that incorporate developmental, neurobiological,
social and environmental factors, and building predictive
theories of real-world reasoning are urgently needed. To
this end, NICHD has called together a multidisciplinary
work group of leading scientists to identify current knowledge and advancement gaps in reasoning research. Speakers
will present current research and focus attention on issues
identified by the work group that can be addressed in both

2015 Annual Meeting

the short and longer term before the field can significantly
advance. Aaron Blaisdell will introduce evidence of pigeon
spatial- and rat causal-inferences, the value and utility of
animal models of reasoning. Silvia Bunge will explore brain
changes associated with developing reasoning ability and
how brain plasticity might be manipulated to improve
reasoning. Ben Rottman will examine how people make
sophisticated causal inferences with incomplete information. Daniel Krawczyk will introduce the disordered reasoning witnessed in Autism Spectrum Disorder and Traumatic
Brain Injury, the underlying neural perturbations, and the
clinical implications of disordered reasoning. In each case,
the speakers’ own research will both highlight new understanding and important gaps in reasoning research.

TALK 1: COMPARATIVE BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE OF
REASONING PROCESSES.
Aaron Blaisdell1; 1UCLA
Reasoning has long been thought to be a uniquely human
capacity, but it did not appear de novo in our species.
Rather, reasoning is found in a wide spectrum of primate
and non-primate species. In this talk, I will review just some
of the many elements of reasoning that are found in nonhumans, focusing on experiments in rats and pigeons. I will
discuss my own work on spatial inferences in pigeons and
causal inferences and imagery in rats, including the neural
circuitry that is involved in reasoning about absent events.
Despite this increased sophistication in our understanding, the neural basis of reasoning in animals has received
inadequate attention. Further, very recent discoveries of
deep homologies at the cell-molecular level for many of the
brain/cognitive phenotypes seen in humans will be discussed, linking their ancestry far back in evolutionary time.
These new cell-molecular mechanisms provide a window
to study ontogeny of cognition and an opportunity to fill
knowledge gaps. Animal models, such as the rat and the
pigeon, can provide valuable tools to investigate the role of
neurodevelopmental processes and life-history experience
in the establishment of the adult form of reasoning. Animal
models can be interrogated at the cell-molecular, neural circuit, behavioral, and computation levels of analysis. Thus,
with the advent of more sophisticated neuroimaging and
neuromanipulation techniques and assessment of neurogenetics during development, the field of development of
reasoning is poised to enter a renaissance and dramatically
improve our understanding of human cognitive development and dysfunction.

TALK 2: NEURAL MECHANISMS, DEVELOPMENT, AND
PLASTICITY OF REASONING
Silvia Bunge1; 1University of California at Berkeley
Reasoning, the ability to think logically and solve novel problems, is a prerequisite for scholastic achievement. Despite
– or because of – its central role in theories of human intelligence, reasoning has in recent years fallen out of research
favor. As the United States slips behind other industrialized
nations in mathematics and science achievement, it is time

Mini-Symposium Sessions

to revisit reasoning research with a fresh perspective. First
I will briefly review evidence that various forms of deductive reasoning recruit overlapping regions within the lateral
frontoparietal network (LFPN). Specifically, the inferior
parietal lobule and rostrolateral prefrontal cortex play key
roles in relational reasoning; I will suggest that their contributions may be domain-general. I will then report on longitudinal brain imaging in children ages 6-21, identifying
structural and functional changes within the LFPN that best
predict the growth of reasoning ability over childhood and
adolescence. Next, I will show that 3 months of intensive
practice of reasoning skills leads to structural and functional
changes in the LFPN in young adults. Finally, I will describe
how we are using eyetracking methodology and lateralized
stimulus presentation techniques to gain novel insights into
how people reason. These studies point to the need for further exploration of: (1) domain-general and domain-specific
brain mechanisms that support reasoning, (2) changes in
brain structure and function that support optimal reasoning development over childhood and adolescence, (3) the
extent to which reasoning skills can be improved via experience-dependent brain plasticity, and (4) approaches for
monitoring and predicting the growth of reasoning.

TALK 3: CAUSAL REASONING: THE ROLE OF TEMPORAL
HEURISTICS FOR SOPHISTICATED INFERENCES
Ben Rottman1; 1University of Pittsburgh
When learning and reasoning about causal relationships,
people are faced with an extremely challenging and underdetermined problem. For example, people often do not
know how the data were generated or have misconceptions
about the data, and different beliefs and assumptions can
lead to different inferences. In the last 15 years, Bayesian
models of causal learning originally developed by computer
scientists and philosophers have been applied and extended
as models of human causal reasoning. Bayesian models are
extremely flexible and explain how a rational agent should
incorporate knowledge and beliefs when learning in a new
situation. However, much of this research has ignored the
process or algorithmic-level description of human causal
reasoning, focusing exclusively on the computational level. I
will discuss research showing that people often make highly
sophisticated and flexible causal inferences that go beyond
the typical assumptions of most learning algorithms. Yet,
these inferences are intuitive and amenable to simple heuristics. Many of these inferences rely upon subtle temporal
cues to causality. Furthermore because they unfold over
time, these inferences are easily interpretable with algorithmic explanations. At the same time, these inferences often
provide insight into pre-existing assumptions and beliefs
people have when engaging in causal reasoning, and can
inform a Bayesian or computational-level analysis. New
models of probabilistic reasoning are reshaping the field of
reasoning in dramatic and important ways. To develop a
thorough understanding of causal reasoning and probabilistic reasoning more generally, future research will need to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

23

Mini-Symposium Sessions

integrate heuristic and algorithmic-level explanations with
computational-level explanations of reasoning.

TALK 4: CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR DEFICITS OF
REASONING: EVIDENCE FROM AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDERS AND TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Daniel Krawczyk1; 1University of Texas at Dallas and the University
of Texas-Southwestern Medical Center
Reasoning depends on multiple factors including perceiving
the relevant context, recall of appropriate knowledge to a
given situation, and inference processes. Neuroscience studies have begun to contribute to several of these processes
by specifying the conditions when they are engaged and
mapping cognition to neural systems. I will discuss examples from three lines of research that illustrate important
correspondences between cognitive processes and neural
function. First, neuroimaging studies provide converging
evidence for the importance of the prefrontal cortex and its
functional connections in governing relational perception,
the verification of rules, and generating inferences. Second,
evidence from adolescents demonstrates that perceiving
similarity at multiple levels is needed for abstract reasoning. Such abilities are disrupted in clinical conditions such
as traumatic brain injury, and conditions affecting social
perception such as autism and schizophrenia. Lastly, neuroimaging studies of expertise highlight the importance
of our knowledge of previous successes. Together these
approaches provide a more complete picture of the abilities
important for reasoning as well as the multiple brain regions
and interconnectivity that supports reasoning. Despite our
progress to date, there has not been adequate agreement
within the field about the key sub-processes that contribute
to reasoning. Neuroscience evidence can help to achieve
greater clarity on these sub-processes. To achieve this end
the research community will need to seek methods that will
provide both experimental control and the ability to scale
research to simulate the complexity faced in real world reasoning, including social factors, multi-tasking, and the limits
of human expertise.

Mini-Symposium Session 4
CEREBELLAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO LEARNING
AND COGNITION
Monday, March 30, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Rich Ivry, University of California, Berkeley
Co-Chair: Arseny Sokolov, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudoi
Speakers: Rich Ivry, Aparna Suvrathan, Arseny Sokolov, Julie Fiez
This symposium will provide an overview of current ideas
concerning the contribution of the cerebellum to learning
and cognitive processing. Recent findings from neurophysiology, neuropsychology and brain imaging have led to significant changes in our understanding of the mapping and
function of the cerebellum. The symposium will feature an
interdisciplinary panel of speakers who will present stateof-the-art research, diverse views and approaches employed
24

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

to understand cerebellar contributions to learning and cognition. Ivry will discuss the role of the cerebellum in motor
learning, and ask how computational principles derived
from this work may help explain non-motor functions of
this structure. Suvrathan will describe physiological work
that addresses how synaptic learning rules are implemented
by the cerebellar circuit. Sokolov will present lesion and
imaging evidence on the interaction between the cerebellum and temporal cortex during the visual perception of
action. Fiez will address the role of the cerebellum in the
development of skilled reading, also drawing on lesion and
neuroimaging data. The speakers will integrate their talks to
consider general principles of intracerebellar processing and
cerebellar-cortical communication. The symposium should
be of substantial interest to the cognitive neuroscience community, providing fresh ideas on the interaction between the
cerebellum and cortex, one that has attracted considerable
interest in literatures as diverse as motor control, cognition,
psychiatry and development.

TALK 1: THE PREDICTIVE BRAIN: CEREBELLAR CONTRIBUTIONS TO ACTION AND COGNITION
Rich Ivry1; 1University of California, Berkeley
Sensorimotor learning can be studied by asking participants to move in novel workspaces in which they encounter
novel forces or systematic distortions of visual feedback
(e.g., where the visual feedback is translated or rotated in
space). In such tasks, people adapt a sensorimotor map to
implicitly compensate for the perturbation. Patients with
cerebellar degeneration exhibit a pronounced impairment
on such tasks. This learning impairment does not appear
to be directly related to problems in motor control per
se, but rather in generating expectancies of the sensory
consequences of the movements. These expectancies are
compared with the actual feedback to generate sensory
prediction errors, a signal used to adapt an internal model
of the workspace. Recent work has highlighted the obligatory and modular nature of this cerebellar learning system;
for example, error-based learning from sensory prediction
errors continues to occur even under conditions in which
this process is maladaptive. A failure to generate and utilize
sensory predictions has also been observed in people with
psychiatric disorders such as autism and schizophrenia,
conditions in which there is consistent evidence of cerebellar
pathology. This work suggests a computational hypothesis
concerning how cerebellar dysfunction might contribute to
the cognitive deficits observed in these psychiatric populations, as well as a more general view of cerebellar function
in healthy individuals.

TALK 2: TUNING OF SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY FOR
CEREBELLAR LEARNING
Aparna Suvrathan1, Jennifer Raymond1; 1Stanford University
A broad goal in neuroscience is to understand how the features of behavior and cognition are shaped by the properties of neurons and synapses. Our lab is studying how the
neural learning algorithms emerge from, and are shaped by

2015 Annual Meeting

local rules controlling the induction of plasticity at different
synapses within the circuit. It has been widely assumed that
the plasticity rules are uniform across a given brain structure. For example, the cerebellum is composed of clearly
distinct functional zones, with different behavioral roles
and hence computational requirements, yet models linking
synaptic plasticity mechanisms to cerebellar learning have
been based largely on the synaptic properties reported in
one small, physiologically accessible region of the cerebellum. We directly compared the synaptic learning rules at
equivalent synapses in different functional zones of the cerebellum, and found striking differences. These differences
seem to reflect tuning of the plasticity mechanisms for the
computational requirements of the specific kinds of learning
implemented by each zone.

TALK 3: INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE CEREBELLUM
AND TEMPORAL CORTEX DURING ACTION PERCEPTION
Arseny Sokolov1; 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland
Visual perception of human actions is indispensable in our
everyday life. Observation of biological motion subserves
motor learning, car driving and non-verbal social communication. While the cortical system for action observation
has been studied in great detail, subcortical contributions to
action understanding have received minimal attention. Our
data from neurosurgical patients with tumors to the cerebellum indicate that the integrity of left lateral cerebellar structures is essential for the veridical perception of body motion.
Several lines of neuroimaging evidence provide converging
evidence in support of this hypothesis. 1) Activity in the left
lateral cerebellar lobules Crus I and VIIB in healthy adults is
related to action observation. 2) Dynamic causal modelling
reveals reciprocal communication between the left lateral
cerebellum and the right superior temporal sulcus, a key
structure of the cortical networks for action observation and
social cognition. 3) A direct structural pathway between
these regions can be identified with diffusion tensor imaging. 4) Recovery of biological motion processing after cerebellar tumor removal is paralleled by topographical reorganization in the corresponding cerebro-cerebellar network.
In summary, lesion and multimodal imaging evidence
illustrate the role of the cerebellum in the circuitry for visual
processing of body motion. The findings open a window for
further research on interactions between the cerebellum and
temporal cortex in social cognition, multimodal integration,
language processing, and in neuropsychiatric conditions,
such as multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, schizophrenia or autistic spectrum disorders.

TALK 4: CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE CEREBELLUM TO
READING DEVELOPMENT
Julie Fiez1; 1University of Pittsburgh
Neurobiological studies of developmental dyslexia have
focused predominantly on regions in a dorsal temporo-frontal pathway associated with phonological analysis and

Mini-Symposium Sessions

speech production, and its interconnections with a putative
visual word form area in the mid-fusiform gyrus. However,
recent work has provided renewed support for a cerebellar deficit hypothesis of developmental dyslexia proposed
20 years ago. Despite increased evidence in support of this
hypothesis, the functional role of the cerebellum in normal
and disordered reading remains poorly understood. To gain
traction on this issue, a task overlap approach was used to
identify cerebellar regions that are active in normal readers
learning new visual word forms, and also in two tasks in
which normal performance correlates with reading skill
(rhyme judgment, immediate serial recall). Based upon the
results of this analysis, it is suggested that orthographic
learning makes use of a decoding scaffold that involves
speech motor planning, with the cerebellum contributing a
phonological error-monitoring component to this scaffold.
This interpretation is explored through convergent work
involving participants with focal lesions to the cerebellum.
Phonological analysis and orthographic learning deficits in
this population provide support for a phonological monitoring account of cerebellar contributions to orthographic-phonological mapping. Together, the imaging and lesion
results provide a neuroanatomical basis for the self-teaching
hypothesis of reading (Share, 1995) and a theoretical framework for understanding the role of the cerebellum in the
development of skilled reading.

Mini-Symposium Session 5
DISRUPTING THE FACE PERCEPTION NETWORK
Monday, March 30, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom B/C
Chair: David Pitcher, NIMH
Speakers: Arash Afraz, Marlene Behrmann, David Pitcher, Kevin
Weiner
Faces are rich sources of social information that simultaneously convey someones identity, attentional focus, and
emotional state. Our visual system is so efficient that, to us,
processing this information appears to happen effortlessly.
Yet the simplest functions, like recognizing your mother or
judging her mood, depend on interactions across a network
of specialized brain regions. Despite many years of study
our understanding of the unique functions performed by
each region and how these regions interact to facilitate face
perception remains limited. The speakers in this symposium use novel combinations of experimental techniques to
study the behavioural effects of disruption in the face perception network. Our aims are to update the fundamental
understanding of how faces are cortically represented and
to establish common theoretical ground among researchers.
To achieve this we will present studies using a range of subject populations (healthy-humans, brain-damaged patients,
pre-operative epileptic patients and non-human primates)
and experimental methods (optogenetics, fMRI, microstimulation, physiology, TMS, diffusion weighted imaging
and neuropsychology). We believe this symposium will be
of great interest to CNS attendees for two reasons. Firstly,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

25

Mini-Symposium Sessions

understanding the neural processes underlying face perception has proven to be a testing ground in which key disputes
concerning anatomical specificity and computational modularity take place and which therefore generates great interest
amongst all cognitive neuroscientists. Secondly, studying
the face network serves as a proxy for studying the whole
brain as a network and we believe attendees will be eager
to apply the experimental techniques discussed to address
their own questions.

TALK 1: THE CAUSAL ROLE OF FACE-SELECTIVE
NEURONS IN FACE PERCEPTION.
Arash Afraz1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Many neurons in the inferior temporal cortex (IT) of non-human primates respond more strongly to images of faces than
to images of non-face objects. Such so-called “face neurons”
are thought to be involved in face recognition behaviors
such as face detection and face discrimination. While this
view implies a causal role for face neurons in such behaviors,
the main body of neurophysiological evidence to support it
is only correlational. Here, I bring together evidence from
electrical microstimulation, optogenetic and pharmacological intervention in macaques to bridge the gap between the
neural spiking of IT face selective neurons and face perception.

TALK 2: REVERSE ENGINEERING THE FACE PERCEPTION
SYSTEM: INSIGHTS FROM CONGENITAL PROSOPAGNOSIA

2015 Annual Meeting

TALK 3: TRANSIENT DISRUPTION IN THE FACE
PERCEPTION NETWORK: COMBINING TMS AND FMRI
David Pitcher1; 1National Institute of Mental Health
Faces contain structural information, for identifying individuals, as well as changeable information, that can convey
emotion and direct attention. Neuroimaging studies reveal
brain regions that exhibit preferential responses to invariant or changeable facial aspects but the functional connections between these regions are unknown. This issue
was addressed by causally disrupting two face-selective
regions with thetaburst transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TBS) and measuring the effects of this disruption in local
and remote face-selective regions with functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants were scanned, over
two sessions, while viewing dynamic or static faces and
objects. During these sessions, TBS was delivered over the
right occipital face area (rOFA) or right posterior superior
temporal sulcus (rpSTS). Disruption of the rOFA reduced
the neural response to both static and dynamic faces in the
downstream face-selective region in the fusiform gyrus.
In contrast, the response to dynamic and static faces was
doubly dissociated in the rpSTS. Namely, disruption of the
rOFA reduced the response to static but not dynamic faces,
while disruption of the rpSTS itself, reduced the response
to dynamic but not static faces. These results suggest that
dynamic and static facial aspects are processed via dissociable cortical pathways that begin in early visual cortex, a conclusion inconsistent with current models of face perception.

TALK 4: THE HUMAN FACE PROCESSING NETWORK
IS RESILIENT AFTER RESECTION OF SPECIALIZED
Reverse engineering involves disassembling a complex CORTICAL INPUTS

Marlene Behrmann1; 1Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon
University, USA

device and analyzing its components and workings in detail
with the goal of understanding how the device works in its
intact state. To elucidate the neural components implicated
in normal face perception, we investigate the disrupted
components in individuals with congenital prosopagnosia, an apparently lifelong impairment in face processing,
despite normal vision and other cognitive skills. Structural
and functional MRI data reveal compromised connectivity
between more posterior face-selective cortical patches and
more anterior regions that respond to face stimuli. Computational descriptions of the topology of this connectivity,
using measures from graph theory that permit the construction of the network at the level of the whole brain, uncover
atypical organization of the face network in CP. Moreover,
this network disorganization is increasingly pronounced
as a function of severity of the face recognition disorder.
Last, we reconstruct the face images viewed by normal and
prosopagnosic observers from the neural data and demonstrate the altered underlying representations in key cortical
regions in the prosopagnosic individuals. This multipronged
approach uncovers in fine-grained detail the alteration in
information discrimination in the prosopagnosic individuals as well as the pertubations in the neural network that
gives rise to normal face perception.

26

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Kevin Weiner1; 1Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Functional hierarchies are a prevalent feature of brain organization. In high-level visual cortex, the “occipital face area”
(OFA/IOG-faces) is thought to be the input to a specialized
processing hierarchy subserving human face perception.
However, evidence supporting or refuting the causal role of
IOG-faces as a necessary input to the face network evades
researchers because it necessitates a patient with a focal
lesion of the right inferior occipital cortex, as well as functional measurements both before and after surgical removal
of this region. Here, in a rare patient fulfilling both of these
requirements, we show that the face network is surprisingly
resilient in two ways following surgical removal of IOGfaces. First, the large-scale cortical layout and selectivity
of the face network are stable after removal of IOG-faces.
Second, following resection, face-selective responses in ventral temporal cortex surprisingly become more reliable in
the resected hemisphere, but not in the intact hemisphere.
Further investigations of the anatomical underpinnings of
this resiliency using diffusion tensor imaging suggest the
existence of additional white matter pathways connecting
early visual cortex to downstream face-selective regions
independent of IOG-faces. Thus, after resection, neural signals can still reach downstream regions via these pathways

2015 Annual Meeting

that are largely unconsidered by present neurofunctional
models of face processing. Altogether, these measurements
indicate that IOG-faces is not the key input to the face network. Furthermore, our results pose important constraints
on hierarchical models in high-level sensory cortices and
provide powerful insight into the resiliency of such networks after damage or cortical trauma.

Mini-Symposium Session 6
APPROACHES TO IDENTIFY NETWORK CONNECTIVITY IN NEUROIMAGING
Monday, March 30, 10:00 am - Noon, Bay View Room
Chair: Vaughn Steele, The Mind Research Network
Co-Chair: Vince Calhoun, The Mind Research Network
Speakers: Vaughn R. Steele, Edward M. Bernat, Selin Aviyente,
Vince D. Calhoun
Connectivity measures are widely used to identify neural
correlates of cognitive functions, however many approaches
ignore the possibility of time-varying connectivity. We
present a series of talks which provide approaches that
move beyond such static measures and capture transient or
recurring patterns of connectivity. Whole brain connectivity analyses of cognitive control tasks will be presented for
electroencephalogram (EEG), event-related potential (ERP),
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data.
First, we will review steps to ensure reliable cognitive control related signal in both ERP and fMRI. We replicate and
extend previous reports by including both ERP and fMRI
analysis with stabilization techniques such as bootstrapping
and subsampling. Two of the talks are based on a recently
proposed complex Cohen’s class time-frequency distribution (Aviyente et al., 2011) to calculate phase-locking values
(PLV) providing improved time-frequency resolution. The
first utilizes bivariate PLV measures, demonstrating sensitivity to cognitive and motor processes in several active
task paradigms. The next talk introduces a multivariate tensor-based dynamic functional connectivity tracking framework to provide a data-driven approach to characterizing
changes in network connectivity across time and to determine the different network states during cognitive control
based on EEG data. Finally, we will discuss methods related
to dynamic functional connectivity of fMRI data using independent component analysis. This includes approaches to
both estimation and characterization of recurring patterns
of connectivity ‘states’ which may overlap as well as global
measures of state behavior ‘meta-states’. Taken together, we
summarize practical steps for characterizing intrinsic networks measured using EEG, ERP, and fMRI.

TALK 1: NEUROIMAGING MEASURES OF COGNITIVE
CONTROL: EXTRACTING RELIABLE SIGNALS
Vaughn R. Steele1, Edward M. Bernat2, Vince D. Calhoun1, Kent A.
Kiehl1; 1The Mind Research Network, 2University of Maryland
Reliability of measured signal has long been a concern for
researchers using event-related potential (ERP) and func-

Mini-Symposium Sessions

tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Using ERP data,
reliability measures have been explored in neural correlates
of cognitive control (i.e., response inhibition and error-monitoring) suggesting the necessity of 6 to 8 trials. However,
identifying the number of trials needed for reliable cognitive
control signal measured in fMRI and number of participant
needed in each modality has yet to be fully examined. Datasets of healthy participants (ERP n=137; fMRI n=102) who
performed a Go/NoGo task were analyzed to replicate and
extend previous reports. Specifically, we sought to identify
the necessary number of trials and participants needed to
achieve reliable cognitive control signal in each neuroimaging modality. Measures related to a false alarm (error-monitoring) were extracted for analysis from ERP (error-related
negativity [ERN] and error positivity [Pe]) and fMRI (anterior-cingulate cortex activation) data. For each modality,
Cronbach’s alpha became consistent at a similar number of
trials (6-8) and number of participants (30-50). Stabilization
techniques (i.e., bootstrapping and subsampling) were also
used to extract subject-level data for comparison. In addition to these extracted values, simulations were included to
highlight advantages when applied to analysis of network
connectivity (i.e., characterizing complex patterns of activation among interconnected brain regions). Therefore, we
outline best-practices in measuring reliable error-monitoring signals in both ERP and fMRI with respect to the necessary number of trials and participants. Also, we review
advantages of using stabilization techniques specifically for
analysis of network connectivity.

TALK 2: INDEXING DYNAMIC FUNCTIONAL INTEGRATION
USING BIVARIATE TIME-FREQUENCY PHASE-SYNCHRONY WITH EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL DATA
Edward M. Bernat1, Selin Aviyente,2, Andrey Anokhin2, Jason
Moser3, N. B. Schmidt4; 1University of Maryland, 2Washington
University School of Medicine, 3Michigan State University, 4Florida
State University
Dynamic functional integration of brain regions during
task performance is an important emerging topic of study.
Recent work with ERPs has begun to demonstrate the utility
of time-frequency (TF) phase-synchrony (PS) approaches for
indexing functional integration. Based on a recently developed TF-PS distribution (Aviyente et al., 2011), the work to
be presented provides evidence that this TF-PS measure can
successfully index dynamic functional integration associated
with relevant cognitive and affective processing involving
medial-prefrontal (mPFC), lateral-prefrontal (lPFC), motor,
and occipital regions. Findings from four studies will be
detailed. The first is a longitudinal study of adolescents (at
ages: 12, 14, 16; N=214) engaged in a gambling task. Findings
indicate that dynamic mPFC-lPFC and lPFC-motor functional integration increases significantly during this period
of development. The second study (N=95) investigates functional integration during a common go/no-go task. Here
greater mPFC-lPFC integration is observed for no-go trials,
and greater mPFC integration with contralateral motor areas
during response execution (go) and inhibition (no-go). The
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

27

Mini-Symposium Sessions

final two studies involve clinically-relevant individual differences. In the first (N=94), increases in worry (Penn State
Worry Questionnaire, PSWQ) are independently associated
with increased error-related negativity (ERN) amplitude
and a decrease in mPFC-lPFC functional integration. The
fourth study (N=85, collection ongoing) involves gambling
feedback ERP data from anxiety patients who have varying
levels of suicidal thoughts and urges. Results indicate that
both amplitude and mPFC-lPFC TF-PS are related to level of
suicidal presentation. Broadly, findings validate the bivariate PLV measure, and provide motivation for the development of multivariate approaches.

TALK 3: A TENSOR-BASED APPROACH TO TRACKING
DYNAMICS OF FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE
BRAIN
Selin Aviyente1, David Zoltowski1, Arash Mahyari1, Edward M.
Bernat2; 1Michigan State University, 2University of Maryland
With the advances in neuroimaging technology, it is now
possible to collect multi-channel neurophysiological signals
such as electroencephalogram (EEG) data across different
experimental conditions and subject groups. In this talk,
we propose tensor tracking and compression algorithms
to identify change points in network topography and to
summarize the quasi-stationary network states. Tucker
decomposition of the functional connectivity networks
across frequency bands, subjects and time allows us to capture the variation of these higher order datasets using a few
orthogonal factors. Using lower rank approximations to the
tensor at each time point and subspace distance metrics to
quantify the change in the network across time, we identify
the change points. Once the change points are detected, each
time interval is compressed to a single network state representation through tensor-matrix projection and sparsity
optimization. The proposed dynamic functional connectivity network tracking methods are applied to EEG data collected during a study of cognitive control in the brain. The
results indicate that during error processing, the brain’s network organization across time and subjects can be efficiently
described using 5 distinct network states in the theta (2-5Hz)
frequency band, where the network states closely align with
the subject’s response time, onset of error-related negativity
(ERN) and onset of the error positivity (P3e). Moreover, the
topographic summarization of these network states indicates activation of broader brain regions before the response
and more specialized and sparse activation patterns during
ERN in particular between the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) and lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC).

TALK 4: THE CHRONNECTOME: TIME-VARYING CONNECTIVITY NETWORKS AS THE NEXT FRONTIER IN FMRI
DATA DISCOVERY
Vince D. Calhoun1, Vaughn R. Steele1; 1The Mind Research Network
Recent years have witnessed a rapid growth of interest in
moving functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
functional connectivity investigations beyond simple scan28

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

length averages and into approaches that capture time-varying properties of connectivity. In this perspective we use the
term “chronnectome” to describe such metrics that allow a
dynamic view of coupling. In the chronnectome, coupling
refers to possibly time-varying levels of correlated or mutually informed activity between brain regions whose spatial
properties may also be temporally evolving. We primarily
focus on multivariate approaches developed in our group,
and review a number of such approaches with an emphasis on matrix decompositions such as principle component
analysis and independent component analysis. We also discuss the potential these approaches offer to improve characterization and understanding of brain function, which is
inherently dynamic, not-well understood, and thus poorly
suited to conventional scan-averaged connectivity measurements. We show examples of how dynamic connectivity
can provide important information for both resting fMRI
and task-based fMRI (e.g. go/nogo task) data. There are
a number of methodological directions which need to be
developed further, but chronnectome approaches already
show great promise for the study of both the healthy and
diseased brain.

Mini-Symposium Session 7
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE PREFRONTAL
CORTEX AND THE MEDIAL-TEMPORAL LOBES
SUPPORTING THE CONTROL OF MEMORY
RETRIEVAL
Monday, March 30, 3:30 - 5:30 pm, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Michael Anderson, University of Cambridge
Co-Chair: David Badre, Brown University
Speakers: Helen Barbas, Michael Anderson, David Badre, Howard
Eichenbaum
Although memory retrieval often occurs automatically,
adaptive behavior frequently recruits cognitive control
processes that guide retrieval in a goal directed manner.
Sometimes this control demand arises because memories
may be difficult to retrieve, due to interference or other
factors; other times, the retrieval process itself may need
to be suppressed to support cognitive or emotional goals.
Moreover, the products of retrieval need to be monitored
for adaptive outcomes. Whereas episodic retrieval depends
on medial temporal lobe (MTL) systems, the cognitive control of memory retrieval is known to require the prefrontal
cortex (PFC), and it is widely believed that cognitive control
over memory is achieved by PFC-MTL interactions. Despite
this, relatively little is known about the nature of these interactions or the pathways that support them. In this symposium, we examine the nature of PFC-MTL interactions, the
pathways mediating them, computations performed, and
the mnemonic functions they serve. To address this issue,
we bring together research with diverse methods and perspectives, ranging from work with functional and structural
imaging with humans, to anatomical studies in non-human
primates, and single unit electrophysiology studies of fron-

2015 Annual Meeting

to-hippocampal interactions in rodents. We further examine
both excitatory and inhibitory modulations of MTL function, in support of the controlled use of memory.

TALK 1: PRIMATE PREFRONTAL PATHWAYS TO RHINAL
AREAS AFFECT THE INPUT AND OUTPUT OF THE
HIPPOCAMPUS AND MEMORY
Helen Barbas1; 1Boston University
How does information from prefrontal cortices influence
memory-related medial temporal cortices? Robust pathways
from the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), associated with the
contextual significance of stimuli, innervate the entorhinal
cortex, the gateway to the hippocampus. On the other hand,
the posterior orbitofrontal cortex (pOFC), associated with
the affective value of stimuli, innervates mostly adjacent
perirhinal area 36. Both pathways innervate all layers of the
respective cortices, suggesting direct or indirect influence on
the upper (input) and deep (output) layers of the hippocampus. Both pathways innervate mostly excitatory neurons
and smaller though significant proportions innervate inhibitory neurons in the respective rhinal cortices. Among the
latter, in the upper layers of the entorhinal cortex the ACC
pathway innervates the neurochemical class of calretinin
inhibitory neurons, which have disinhibitory influence on
nearby excitatory pyramidal neurons, suggesting facilitated
passage to the hippocampus. On the other hand, in the upper
layers of area 36 the pOFC pathway innervates preferentially
calbindin inhibitory neurons, which are synaptically suited
to reduce noise and enhance signal, suggesting facilitated
focus on relevant stimuli and filtering out noise. In the deep
rhinal layers, which receive the output of the hippocampus,
both ACC and pOFC pathways innervate preferentially the
powerful parvalbumin inhibitory neurons which provide
strong perisomatic inhibition of nearby excitatory neurons.
These findings suggest that ACC and pOFC pathways facilitate access of stimuli with contextual and affective significance to the hippocampus, but gate hippocampal output to
the cortex and may determine which memories endure.

TALK 2: A RIGHT DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL
PATHWAY SUPPORTS THE SUPPRESSION OF MNEMONIC
FUNCTIONS IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS
Michael Anderson1, Taylor Schmitz1, Catarina Ferreira2; 1University
of Cambridge, 2University of Granada
Although memory for the past is usually viewed as desirable, our cognitive and affective goals often require us to
limit the accessibility of unwanted memories. For example,
people clearly limit the time they spend thinking about
unpleasant experiences, a process that begins during encoding, but that continues when cues later remind someone of
the unwelcome memory. In this talk, I will review the emerging behavioral and neuroimaging evidence that stopping
the episodic retrieval process to suppress awareness of an
unwelcome memory is achieved by a supramodal inhibitory
control mechanism mediated by the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. This mechanism overlaps with mechanisms
involved in motor response suppression. Functional and

Mini-Symposium Sessions

effective connectivity analyses indicate that this top-down
control mechanism interacts with medial-temporal lobe
structures, disrupting traces that support retention. This
mnemonic stopping mechanism acts to globally suppress
neural activity in the hippocampus, likely via GABA-ergic
interneurons, disrupting both retrieval and encoding processes in non-specific fashion. These findings indicate that
the fundamental mnemonic functions of the hippocampus
are subject to strategic regulation, and that such regulation
introduces lasting biases in which life events remain accessible

TALK 3: SEPARABLE VENTRAL AND DORSAL FRONTAL
PATHWAYS SUPPORTING COGNITIVE CONTROL DURING
RETRIEVAL.
David Badre1; 1Brown University
It has been well established that memory retrieval performance can be improved through strategic processes. These
strategic processes are supported by executive or cognitive
control systems that depend, in part, on the frontal lobes.
However, the pathways by which frontal cortex can influence memory retrieval, such as in the medial temporal lobe
system, remains under specified. In this talk, I will discuss a
line of recent studies using human imaging that investigate
the pathways linking prefrontal cortex with MTL during the
cognitive control of memory. First, I will describe a set of
fMRI and functional connectivity experiments demonstrating a functional dissociation between ventral versus dorsal
pathways related to control over access to memory versus
control over responding. Then, I will provide evidence from
high angular resolution diffusion tractography that elaborates the organization of these pathways in the human brain.

TALK 4: AN ANIMAL MODEL SYSTEM FOR UNDERSTANDING PREFRONTAL-HIPPOCAMPAL INTERACTIONS
IN MEMORY RETRIEVAL
Howard Eichenbaum1; 1Boston University
In humans, in interactions between the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) and hippocampus support the retrieval of memories
that are relevant to the current context. Here I will outline a
rodent model system in which prefrontal-hippocampal interactions can be explored at the level of information coding
by neuronal ensembles and local field potentials within
these brain areas. Similar to neuropsychological findings
in humans, damage to the hippocampus in rats increases
forgetting whereas damage to PFC results in failure to
suppress context-inappropriate memories. Consistent with
these findings, representational similarity analysis reveals
that the dorsal (posterior in humans) hippocampus creates a
systematic organization of highly specific memories within
a context, whereas the ventral (anterior) hippocampus
generalizes across memories within a context and strongly
distinguishes between memories from different contexts.
Furthermore, PFC inactivation reduces the ability of the
dorsal hippocampus to suppress inappropriate memory
representations, consistent with the behavioral findings on
PFC damage. Finally, analysis of the flow of information
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

29

Mini-Symposium Sessions

through the system reveals how bidirectional communication between PFC and the hippocampus supports memory.
This analysis showed that, during context-cued memory
retrieval, contextual cues initially processed by the ventral
hippocampus are sent to PFC, likely via well-known monosynaptic projections; then PFC controls retrieval of memory
representations in the dorsal hippocampus by suppressing
the activation of context-inappropriate neural and behavioral responses. These findings converge on an understanding, at the cellular level, of fundamental prefrontal-hippocampal interactions that are common across species and
domains of declarative memory.

Mini-Symposium Session 8
TEMPORAL COORDINATION OF NEURONAL
PROCESSES BY CROSS-FREQUENCY INTERACTIONS
Tuesday, March 31, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom A
Chair: Ole Jensen, Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging
Speakers: Sara Szczepanski, Peter Lakatos, Hyojin Park, Ole
Jensen
Electrophysiological brain activity is dominated by oscillatory activity during cognitive tasks. The oscillations have
been reported in various brain regions and covers a wide
range of frequencies. These oscillations are believed to
orchestrate neuronal processing and the functional connectivity between brain regions. While oscillations in different bands have been well-characterized over the years,
it remains less clear how they interact. Typically robust
phase-to-power interactions between slower and faster
oscillations have been reported in various kinds of task and
species. Examples are delta-to-gamma coupling in auditory
cortex, alpha-to-gamma couplings in visual regions and
theta-to-gamma couplings in the hippocampus. Most likely
the slower oscillations serve to coordinate neuronal processing reflected in higher frequencies bands. The goal of this
symposium is to undercover the state-to-the-art of cross-frequency couplings identified in various cognitive states and
tasks. This will be done in the context of studies on intracranial recordings in non-human primates and MEG and ECoG
recordings in humans. In particular it will be addressed
how cross-frequency interactions serve to support cognition
by organizing neuronal processing over different temporal
scales.

TALK 1: DYNAMIC FRONTO-PARIETAL INTERACTIONS
DURING ATTENTIONAL CONTROL
Sara Szczepanski1, Rachel Kuperman2, Kurtis Auguste2,3, Josef
Parvizi4,5, Robert Knight1; 1University of California, Berkeley 2Children’s Hospital and Research Center, Oakland, CA, 3University of
California, San Francisco, 4Laboratory of Behavioral and Cognitive
Neurology, 5Stanford University, Stanford
Attention, critical to visual perception and goal-directed
behavior, enables allocation of limited resources depending on current task demands. Frontal and parietal cortical
30

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

areas, referred to as the fronto-parietal attentional control
network, are crucial for controlling the attentional selection
process. Although numerous studies have examined the
functions of this network using various neuroimaging techniques, considerably less is known about how these frontal
and parietal areas interact dynamically to produce behavior
on a fine spatio-temporal scale in humans. We examined the
temporal dynamics and interactions within and between
regions of the fronto-parietal network using electrocorticography (ECoG). ECoG signals were measured directly from
subdural electrodes implanted in patients undergoing intracranial monitoring for localization of epileptic foci. Subjects
(n=8) performed a dynamic reaction time task, requiring
attentional allocation to either the right or left visual field
and detection of targets. Phase-amplitude coupling (PAC)
between high gamma power (70-250 Hz) and delta/theta
phase (2-5 Hz) within electrodes over frontal, parietal, and
occipital cortex increased when subjects attended to the
contralateral (vs. ipsilateral) visual field. These PAC modulations tracked attentional performance across single trials.
We also found significant increases in phase coherence in the
delta (2-4 Hz) and theta (5-8 Hz) frequency bands between
intrahemispheric frontal, parietal, and visual electrodes
that was enhanced for attention to the contralateral (vs.
ipsilateral) visual field. These results highlight the roles of
PAC and phase coherence as mechanisms for coordination
within and between human fronto-parietal and visual areas,
which adjust parameters on a sub-second basis depending
on momentary attentional demands.

TALK 2: SLOW MODULATION OF CROSS-FREQUENCY
OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS IN THALAMOCORTICAL
NETWORKS
Peter Lakatos1,2, Annamaria Barczak1, Monica O’Connell1; 1Nathan
Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY 2NYU School of Medicine
When temporally regular stimulus sequences are attended,
the brain’s rhythmic excitability fluctuations become aligned
to these via oscillatory entrainment, in order to sharpen
and stabilize the stimulus representation. The goal of our
study was to examine the global, long time-scale dynamics
of entrainment in primary auditory cortex and thalamus
in non-human primates performing an intermodal selective attention task. For all subjects, neuroelectric activity
was recorded simultaneously using two linear electrode
arrays positioned either in corresponding primary auditory
cortex (A1) regions of the two hemispheres, or auditory
thalamic regions and ipsilateral A1. By analyzing changes
in layer-specific neuronal ensemble activity of A1 and
simultaneous thalamic activity on the timescale of seconds,
we identified a counterphase slow (< 0.1 Hz) fluctuation
of two discrete thalamocortical operational modes. One of
these was characterized by high amplitude delta-theta frequency band neuronal activity, oscillatory entrainment to
the attended stimulus stream, stable response amplitudes
and good behavioral performance. The other distinct operational mode was characterized by high amplitude alpha
oscillations, generally suppressed, more variable event

2015 Annual Meeting

related responses and poor behavioral performance. We
also found that coupling between the amplitude of gamma
oscillations and the phase of lower, alpha vs. delta-theta
band oscillatory activity followed the same counterphase
dynamics, resulting in alpha vs. delta-theta patterning of
high frequency neuronal ensemble activity and neuronal
firing respectively. We propose that the slow counterphase
modulation of oscillatory dynamics in thalamocortical networks reflects intermittent dominance of “task positive”
and “task negative” large-scale functional networks in regulating and utilizing information processing resources.

TALK 3: MULTIPLEXED CROSS-FREQUENCY
INFORMATION TRANSFER DURING CONTINUOUS
SPEECH PERCEPTION
Hyojin Park1, Gregor Thut1, Joachim Gross1; 1Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United
Kingdom
Comprehension of coherent speech entails neural representation from early perceptual processing to higher cognitive
functions as a network. Cortical oscillations are promising
tools to study this network considering their inherent spectrotemporal characteristics. We previously found that segmentation and coding of speech relies on a nested hierarchy
of entrained cortical oscillations. Speech entrains the phase
of delta and theta and the amplitude of gamma oscillations
in the auditory cortex. Importantly, phase entrainment is
stronger in the right auditory cortex and amplitude entrainment is stronger in the left auditory cortex. Based on this
asymmetry, we further investigated top-down directional
information transfer on left and right auditory cortices (LAC
and RAC) using transfer entropy. MEG data from 22 participants was obtained during passive listening to a 7-minute
real-life story (intelligible speech) and the same story played
backward (unintelligible speech). We performed transfer
entropy analysis within and between the relevant frequency
bands (delta, theta, gamma) and identified cortical regions
of information transfer that was significantly stronger in
intelligible than unintelligible speech. Our results revealed
that delta phase in the left inferior frontal gyri including
BA44/45/47 regions and right temporal regions modulated
delta phase in LAC. Interestingly, the left hemisphere delta
phase results match information transfer from gamma to
delta phase in LAC, and the right hemisphere delta phase
results match information transfer from theta to delta phase
in LAC. This suggests that multiplexed directed interactions
between entrained brain oscillations across cortical areas
could be an important mechanism for cortical processing of
continuous speech streams.

TALK 4: HOW COUPLED ALPHA AND GAMMA OSCILLATIONS MIGHT SERVE TO ALLOCATE ATTENTION
Ole Jensen1, Eelke Spaak1, Bart Gips1, Til Ole Bergmann1, Mathilde Bonnefond1; 1Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging,
Radboud University, The Netherlands
In our daily lives we are bombarded with sensory input.
Thus networks in the brain must rely on powerful mech-

Mini-Symposium Sessions

anism for limiting and prioritizing the input flow in order
to prevent information overload. In the rat hippocampus,
it is well established that neurons representing different
spatial representations fire at different phases of the theta
cycle. This mechanism limits the information presented
by producing sweeps of spatial representations organized
according to excitability. Similarly, we hypothesize that
alpha oscillations provide a mechanism for ordering visual
input according to ‘relevance’. This alpha band activity is
under top-down control. Gamma oscillations phase-locked
to the alpha oscillations serve to keep competing representations apart in time. Further, neuronal synchronization in
the gamma band provides a strong feed forward drive. As
a result sweeps representing short ‘to-do-lists’ organized
as a temporal phase code is produced in every alpha cycle.
Empirical support for such a mechanism will be discussed.
These studies are based on MEG in humans performing
various kinds of cross-model, memory and spatial attention
task. Further empirical support includes findings in non-human primates. Finally predictions and future work required
for testing the framework will be discussed.

Mini-Symposium Session 9
FRESH PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL PERCEPTION:
FROM FUNCTIONAL SPECIALIZATION TO
CONNECTIVITY
Tuesday, March 31, 10:00 am - Noon, Grand Ballroom B/C
Chair: Emily S. Cross, Radboud University Nijmegen, Bangor
University
Speakers: Kami Koldewyn, Emily S. Cross, Zeynep Saygin
Over the past decade, a growing interest in the neurobiological foundations of how we perceive and interact with
others has emerged. While the idea of a “social brain” is
not new (c.f., Brothers, 1990), the past several years have
seen ever-increasing neuroimaging studies seeking to map
the neural correlates of myriad social perceptual processes,
ranging from how we perceive bodies or faces to how we
make sense of others’ actions and social interactions. This
minisymposium highlights three novel findings in this
domain, each stemming from a distinct methodological
approach. Kami Koldewyn introduces the discovery of
a portion of the superior temporal sulcus specialized for
perceiving dynamic social interactions. This region was
identified with targeted functional localization scans, which
confirm this region to be distinct from nearby brain areas
sensitive to other social perceptual cues, including biological motion, faces, and bodies. Emily Cross highlights how
effective connectivity approaches, such as dynamic causal
modeling, offer new ways to test models of social action perception. Her work uses DCM to evaluate a predictive coding
model of action observation and demonstrates how familiarity alters effective connectivity between sensorimotor
cortical regions. Finally, Zeynep Saygin uses structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity to explore
functional specialization for several social perceptual feaCognitive Neuroscience Society

31

Mini-Symposium Sessions

tures, including faces, bodies, and theory of mind. Her data
provide converging evidence for a tight link between functional and anatomical connectivity and function. Together,
the presentations emphasize how different methodological
approaches can complement each other and together fuel
novel discoveries in the social perception domain.

TALK 1: IS A REGION IN THE POSTERIOR SUPERIOR
TEMPORAL SULCUS (PSTS) SELECTIVELY ENGAGED IN
THE PERCEPTION OF SOCIAL INTERACTIONS?
Kami Koldewyn1, Sarah Weigelt2, Kilian Semmelmann2, Nancy Kanwisher3; 1Bangor University, 2Fakultät für Psychologie,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 3Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Successful social behavior requires the ability to perceive not
just individuals and their behavior, but pairs of people and
the interactions between them. Social interactions are multifacted, subtle, and important. We can quickly discern if two
people are cooperating or competing, flirting or fighting,
and helping or hindering. The brain basis of this remarkable
ability has remained largely unexplored. Here, using fMRI,
we show that a region in the superior temporal sulcus, identifiable in the majority of subjects individually with a short
functional localizer scan, responds about twice as strongly
when viewing pairs of people interacting with each other
compared to pairs of people acting independently. This
selective response to seeing social interactions is unlikely
to be accounted for in terms of simple perceptual features
because the same region responds more to interactions than
independent actions whether the agents are people depicted
in video clips, people in point-light displays, or simple animated shapes. This functional response is nearby but both
distinct from, and not explainable by, previously reported
cortical responses to biological motion, faces, and other
people’s thoughts. Although the precise computations conducted and representations extracted in this region remain
to be discovered, our evidence points to a specialized role of
this region in the perception of dynamic social interactions.

TALK 2: THE MODULATION OF SENSORIMOTOR CONNECTIVITY BY FAMILIARITY DURING ACTION OBSERVATION
Emily S. Cross1,2, Thomas Gardner2; 1Behavioural Science Institute; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Nijmegen, 2School of Psychology, Bangor
University
Watching another person’s actions engages a network of
sensorimotor brain regions collectively termed the action
observation network (AON). Previous research suggests the
AON is more active when watching familiar compared to
unfamiliar actions. More recent evidence suggests the relationship between AON engagement and action familiarity
is not as straightforward as previously thought, leading to
a re-examination of how an observer’s prior action experience shapes perception of others in motion. We examined
how observed movement familiarity modulates connections
between sensorimotor brain regions using dynamic causal
modeling (DCM), a type of effective connectivity analysis.
Twenty-one subjects underwent fMRI scanning whilst view32

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

ing whole-body movements that varied in terms of their
familiarity. Participants’ task was to either predict the next
posture the dancer’s body would assume or to respond to
a non-action related attentional control question. To assess
individuals’ familiarity with each movement, participants
rated each video on a measure of visual familiarity outside
the scanner. Parametric analyses showed more activity in
left middle temporal gyrus, inferior parietal lobule and inferior frontal gyrus as the videos were rated as increasingly
familiar. These clusters of activity formed the regions of
interest for DCM analyses, which revealed an attenuation
of top-down modulation (influence from anterior to posterior nodes of the AON), as well as attenuation in the corresponding reciprocal connection when participants observed
videos rated as more familiar. The findings provide support
for a predictive coding model of AON function, as well
as illuminate how effective connectivity approaches can
advance understanding of social action perception.

TALK 3: CONNECTIVITY FINGERPRINTS FOR THE SOCIAL
BRAIN
Zeynep Saygin1,2, David E. Osher1,3, Kami Koldewyn4, John Gabrieli1, Rebecca Saxe1, Nancy Kanwisher1; 1Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, MIT, 2Martinos Center, MGH, 3Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, 4School of Psychology,
Bangor University
A fundamental hypothesis in neuroscience is that connectivity mirrors function at a fine spatial grain across the brain.
Previous research supports this hypothesis by demonstrating that the degree of voxelwise face-selectivity in the fusiform gyrus of individual subjects can be predicted from that
voxel’s connections to the rest of the brain (its unique connectivity fingerprint), measured through diffusion-weighted
imaging (DWI). Here we asked whether resting-state functional connectivity (fcMRI) can also predict face-selectivity
in the fusiform, whether structural or functional connectivity
fingerprints also predict other visual selectivities throughout the brain, and whether connectivity fingerprints exist for
higher-level social cognition. We found that both fcMRI and
DWI connectivity predicted face selectivity in the fusiform
more accurately than did a group analysis of face-selectivity
from other subjects. Further, the subset of connections that
best predicted face-selectivity were similar between DWI
and fcMRI. We performed similar comparisons of DWI and
fcMRI connectivity fingerprints for the rest of cortex, for
body, object, and scene perception, and for theory-of-mind
activation. These data provide converging evidence from
both DWI and fcMRI that i) connectivity and function are
tightly linked at a voxelwise scale across the whole brain,
and ii) functionally-selective voxels can be predicted from
either DWI or fcMRI data alone. These results also raise the
possibility that connectivity fingerprints direct the functional specialization of cortex in development. Finally, this
work provides researchers and clinicians with tools to infer
functional brain maps from connectivity alone in individuals who cannot be functionally scanned (e.g., comatose
subjects, sleeping infants).

Poster Schedule
Poster sessions are scheduled for Saturday-Tuesday in Pacific Concourse Exhibition Hall of the San Francisco Hyatt
Regency. All attendees must present their CNS 2015 name badge to enter the exhibit hall. Do not leave personal items in
the poster room.
The presenting author must be present during the assigned session. You may post your materials on the board assigned to
you at any time after the “Set-up Begins” time (listed below), but before the beginning of the assigned poster session. You
must remove your poster promptly no later than the time listed above in “Take-down Complete.” Any posters left up after
the “Take-down Complete” time may be discarded.
Note that presenters are asked to set up poster in advance of their session and to leave their poster up for a period following
their session (see your specific session for hours). This is to allow attendees to view posters outside the formal session times.
Only registered poster presenters, wearing a CNS 2015 meeting badge, for the current session and exhibitors will be allowed
in the exhibit hall during set up and take-down hours. All other attendees will be turned away at the door. No attendee or
exhibitor will be allowed to enter the exhibit hall after the Closed for the Day- No Entry hours.
Poster
Session

Date

Setup
Begins

Session
Begins

Session
Ends

Take-Down
Completed

A

Saturday, March 28

3:00 pm*

3:30 pm

5:30 pm

5:45 pm

B
C
D
E
F

Sunday, March 29
Sunday, March 29
Monday, March 30
Monday, March 30
Monday, March 30

7:30 am*
12:30 pm*
7:30 am*
12:30 pm*
5:00 pm

8:00 am
3:30 pm
8:00 am
1:30 pm
5:30 pm

10:00 am
5:30 pm
10:00 am
3:30 pm
7:30 pm

12:30 pm
5:45 pm
12:30 pm
5:00 pm
7:45 pm

G

Tuesday March 31

7:30 am*

8:00 am

10:00 am

12:00 pm

* Please note that only scheduled registered poster presenters may enter the exhibit hall during the half hour set-up time.
All other attendees may only enter when the exhibit hall opens.
Note: Please remove your poster promptly at take down complete time, so that the next presenter may set up their poster.

People's Choice Poster Award
Vote for your favorite poster during each Poster Session. One winner will be selected per session to receive a $100 Award!
Voting will take place at the Exhibit Hall entrance. Winners will be posted each morning at the Member Services Desk
Sponsored by

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

33

Poster Session A
ATTENTION: Auditory
A1
SEARCHING FOR MULTIPLE AUDITORY TARGETS Marissa L.
Gamble1, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University — Navigating our complex

auditory world requires the selection of relevant auditory stimuli from the
irrelevant. One mechanism that may enable this process to occur rapidly
is the creation of a template of the relevant auditory stimulus, to which
incoming stimuli are compared. Previously, we reported an Early Bilateral
EEG Negativity (EBN) ~60 ms post-stimulus indicating rapid identification of designated-target deviant sounds (Gamble & Woldorff, In press).
This occurred prior to the orientation of attention towards the target (N2ac,
Gamble & Luck, 2011) and does not occur when the target is presented
alone, suggesting a formation of a “relational template”. Our template-capacity limitations and the influence of the presence of multiple deviants on
the processing of relevant deviants are unknown. Here, as in our previous
studies, trials consisted of 10 tones rapidly presented to the left and right
ears. To address the template-capacity limitations, two Search Conditions
were employed: Single-Search where only one deviant tone was relevant,
and Dual-Search, where two deviant tones were relevant. To address the
influence of multiple deviants, two trial types were employed: One-Deviant
trials where only one of the 10 tones was a deviant, and Two-Deviant trials,
where two were deviants. Participants were slower in the Dual-Search
versus Single-Search condition, although no difference in the EBN suggests
a longer-latency source of the behavioral effect. In contrast, the presence of
multiple deviants seemed to reduce the Two-Deviant-trial EBNs, indicating
that the presence of a second salient or deviant stimulus may interfere with
rapid identification and processing.

A2
THE EFFECT OF ATTENTION ON CORTICAL SENSORY WAVEFORMS, THE P1-N1-P2 AND T-COMPLEX, IN POLISH AND
ENGLISH LISTENERS Monica Wagner1, Valerie Shafer2, Mitchell Steinschneider3; 1St. John’s University, Queens, New York, 2The Graduate Center,
City University of New York, 3Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York — Selective attention modulates the P1-N1-P2 and T-complex, components of the auditory evoked potentials (AEPs), through long-range input
from networks supporting attention. Our previous work revealed that the
P1-N1-P2 and T-complex index cortical representation of the time-varying
spectro-temporal features of the spoken word. Currently, we investigate
whether selective attention enhances feature detection at early cortical
stages of processing in native-English and native-Polish listeners. Auditory-evoked potentials (AEPs) were recorded from two groups of English
and Polish participants while they listened to nonsense words pairs within
two testing sessions separated by two months or more. In one of the testing sessions, participants performed a syllable identification task to the
second word in the pairs and in the alternate session, they did not engage
in a behavioral task. Testing sessions were counterbalanced across the two
subject groups. AEPs to the first word in the word pairs were analyzed.
Results reveal a processing negativity within the P1-N1-P2 and T-complex
patterns for the behavioral task condition, in both counterbalanced participant groups. However, representation of spectro-temporal feature processing remains unchanged for all testing conditions irrespective of attention.
Results identify spectro-temporal feature representation within sensory
waveforms for varying task conditions, which is necessary as the P1-N1-P2
and T-complex patterns may serve as phenotypic markers identifying auditory deficits in feature processing.

A3
TWO’S COMPANY, BUT MORE’S A PARTY: THETA-BAND TRACKING IN THE COCKTAIL PARTY Dillon Hambrook1,2, Matthew Tata1,2; 1University of Lethbridge, 2Canadian Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience — Crowded

acoustic environments pose a difficult computational problem, yet your
brain is able to select a single stream of sounds from a mixture of com-

34

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

peting sounds with ease. This is the cocktail party problem. Endogenous
oscillations have been hypothesized to facilitate communication between
brain areas supporting memory, decision making, and response planning.
Neural oscillations are also influenced by exogenous stimuli like speech.
Low frequency (3-8 Hz) electroencephalogram activity tracks quasi-periodic changes in the energy envelope of speech. This tracking is enhanced
for attended speech. One theory suggests that selective entrainment of
neuroelectric activity to the acoustic dynamics of a single stream gives
that stream privileged access to synchronized networks which are the substrates for encoding memories, planning responses and making decisions.
In this model, competing inputs are unsynchronized and are thus excluded
from the dominant network. Evidence from experiments with two competing talkers suggests that selective entrainment may be a mechanism by
which the brain solves the cocktail party problem; however, it is unclear
how such a mechanism functions in more crowded environments. Using a
multi-speaker virtual-reality audio system we simulated a ‘cocktail party’
with up to seven simultaneous speakers at distinct locations while listeners
engage in a selective listening task. By cross-correlating the EEG response
with signals derived from the dynamics of individual acoustic streams we
identify phase-locked activity unique to each stream. We show reduced
phase-tracking of the target stream as distractors are added to the scene.
Furthermore, phase-locked power differentiates correctly and incorrectly
encoded targets.

A4
SELECTIVE ATTENTION TO MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS OF
AUDITORY OBJECTS Sung-Joo Lim1, Jöran Lepsien1, Malte Wöstmann1,
Jonas Obleser1; 1Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
— Selective attention is known to facilitate perceptual processing as it

enhances the precision of stimulus encoding into working memory. While
most of attentional modulation on perceptual processing is investigated
within the visual domain, it is less clear how neural mechanisms of selective attention can modulate auditory processes. Furthermore, is selective
attention equally effective in highlighting representations already encoded
into auditory working memory? Here, we used a retrospective cue in an
auditory pitch-change-detection task to examine the effect of object-based
selective attention during memory retention. On each trial, 17 adult listeners (20–30 years) encoded two sequentially presented syllables that were
equally task-relevant. In some trials, a cue was given during maintenance
to indicate which of the syllables in memory would be probed at the end of
the trial. We found that orienting attention to a specific item in memory led
to effective selection of the attended syllable (faster response) and improvement (higher accuracy) in detecting its precise acoustic change. Psychophysical modeling results also demonstrated a trend towards improved
perceptual precision of the cued item in working memory. Underlining
the inherently sequential nature of auditory information, sequential position of a to-be-probed syllable during encoding modulated the representational quality: When probing auditory syllables that had been followed
by a second syllable during encoding, there was a significant detriment in
performance. The results suggest that the precision of auditory object representations in working memory can be enhanced by selective attention,
but it is not entirely robust to perceptual interference.

A5
LATERALIZED ALPHA OSCILLATIONS REFLECT ATTENTIONAL
SELECTION OF SPEECH IN NOISE Malte Wöstmann1,2, Björn Herrmann1,
Burkhard Maess3, Jonas Obleser1; 1Max Planck Research Group “Auditory Cognition”, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig,
Germany, 2International Max Planck Research School on Neuroscience of Communication, Leipzig, Germany, 3MEG and Cortical Networks Unit, Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany — When
attention is directed to particular objects in the left or right half space,
neural alpha oscillations (~10 Hz) increase in the ipsilateral and decrease
in the contralateral cerebral hemisphere. This alpha lateralization has been
evidenced in anticipation of visual and somatosensory stimulation. It is

2015 Annual Meeting
less clear whether (1) alpha lateralization can also index spatial attention
to one of two ongoing speech streams, and whether (2) alpha lateralization temporally aligns with the presented speech signal. In a magnetoencephalography (MEG) study, human participants listened to two streams
of four spoken digits each. To increase task difficulty, both streams were
spoken by the same talker, presented concurrently to both ears, and precisely aligned to the same word rate of 0.67 Hz. Participants were cued
on each trial to attend to the stream on one ear and to ignore the other.
Following acoustic stimulation, participants had to report the digits from
the to-be-attended stream by choosing from a visual array of digits. Indicating significant stream interference, participants reported more digits from
the to-be-ignored stream compared to random digits that did not occur in
either stream. In the MEG, we found that alpha oscillations during acoustic
stimulation increased ipsi- and decreased contralaterally to the attended
stream. Notably, alpha lateralization fluctuated at the 0.67-Hz word rate
and the magnitude of the 0.67-Hz fluctuations was reduced in erroneous
trials. The current findings show that the temporal alignment of alpha
power lateralization with speech reflects the attentional selection of target
speech against a distractor.

A6
OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS CAN REDUCE THE COCKTAIL
PARTY EFFECT BY LISTENING WITH THE RIGHT EAR Lisa Payne1,
Chad Rogers2, Sujala Maharjan1, Arthur Wingfield1, Robert Sekuler1; 1Brandeis
University, 2Washington University — Auditory attention is crucial to the ability

to selectively listen to a single speech stream in a multi-source environment.
The difference in parietal EEG alpha (8-13 Hz) power across hemispheres
can indicate the direction of auditory attention (Kerlin et al, 2010; Frey et
al, 2014). It is not known if decreased modulation of attention-related alpha
plays a role in the difficulty in hearing that older adults often experience in
a noisy environment. The effect of directed attention on the ability of adults
to selectively filter out distracting information was assessed in a dichotic
listening task. Subjects were cued to attend to the left or right before listening to streams of four unrelated words presented to each ear. They then
indicated whether a spoken probe word had been a member of to-be-attended stream. In young adults, attend-right trials had greater parietal and
right-temporal alpha activity than attend-left trials. Older adults showed
a weaker instantiation of this pattern. The attend-right bias evident in the
alpha oscillations was also observed in the behavioral data. Both groups
were more accurate when attending right; both made more false alarms
to a word from the unattended stream when attending left. Older adults
showed partial modulation of cortical alpha, and were more likely to false
alarm to a word from the unattended stream, particularly when attending left. We hypothesize that the right-ear bias during directed attention to
streams of spoken words reveals an interaction between spatial attention
and the dominance of the left hemisphere for processing language.

ATTENTION: Spatial
A7
SALIENT SOUNDS ACTIVATE VISUAL CORTEX: DISENTANGLING
AUTOMATIC AND VOLUNTARY EFFECTS WITH EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS John J. McDonald1, Alannah T. Wallace1, Ashley C. Livingstone1,
Viola S. Störmer2, Wenfeng Feng3, Steven A. Hillyard3; 1Simon Fraser University, Canada, 2Harvard University, 3University of California San Diego — Salient

peripheral sounds trigger a contralateral event-related potential (ERP) positivity over the occipital scalp. This auditory-evoked contralateral occipital
positivity (ACOP) is present even when the eliciting sound is task-irrelevant, suggesting that it is caused by the automatic deployment of visual
attention to the location of the sound. Here, we tested this automatic-ACOP
hypothesis in a cross-modal cueing task by varying the predictive nature
of a lateral auditory cue. The cue was followed after 1000 ms by a masked
visual target, and in different conditions, 80% of targets appeared at the
location of the cue (predictive-cue blocks) or at a mirror-symmetric location on the opposite side of fixation (counter-predictive-cue blocks). Participants were instructed to attend to the most probable target location and to
discriminate the identity of the target regardless of its location. In the predictive-cue condition, the ACOP was present 250–500 ms post-cue and was
followed by a sustained contralateral occipital negativity previously linked

Poster Session A
to the voluntary deployment of attention (called biasing-related negativity, BRN). If the automatic-ACOP hypothesis is correct, the ACOP should
remain positive in the counter-predictive cue condition – that is, even when
the task is to voluntarily re-direct attention to the opposite side of fixation.
Our findings supported this prediction: the ACOP polarity was unaffected
by the predictive nature of the cue (while the BRN became more positive
in the counter-predictive cue condition). Thus, the present study helps to
disentangle the automatic ACOP from occipital activations driven by the
voluntary deployment of visual attention.

A8
RESPONSE SELECTION DOES NOT CONTRIBUTE TO INHIBITION
OF RETURN Edmund Wascher1, Sven Hoffmann2, Daniel Schneider1; 1IfADo Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, 2German
Sport University Cologne — Inhibition of return means delayed responses for

targets at a cued compared to targets at uncued locations. It is assumed
to reflect delayed re-allocation of attention towards a previously attended
location. Besides an attentional mechanism, IOR could also be due to a cueevoked inhibition to respond towards a cued target. In the present study,
IOR with simple, compatible and incompatible choice responses were compared and tracked by means of event-related EEG activity. Cueing effects
were evaluated for 8 intervals between cue and target, from 80 ms to 1240
ms. IOR was amplified with simple responses but did not differ between
compatible and incompatible responses. Attention related ERP correlates
were constant across CTOAs as were in parts behavioral effects. Early,
rather sensory ERP components, varied with time, reflecting sensory or
attentional interaction of cue and target processing. All these effects did not
vary with response requirements in the choice response tasks, indicating
that response selection does not contribute to IOR.

A9
FACILITATION AND SUPPRESSION IN OBJECT BASED SELECTIVE
ATTENTION Jane Couperus1,2, Colin Quirk1; 1Cognitive Science, Hampshire
College, 2Neuroscience and Behavior Program, University of Massachusetts
at Amherst — Object-based attention studies have shown that facilitation

spreads across objects (Egly, Driver, and Rafal, 1994), enhancing processing
of unattended locations on attended objects. More recently, a pilot study
suggested that suppression of unattended distractor objects within an
attended object may limit the spread of attention (Couperus 2014). However, these initial findings did not account for how the cue location might
influence this interaction as the cue location was confounded with the distractor location in several conditions. Thus, this study sought to clarify the
role of cue location and distractor suppression in object based attention.
Eighteen adults (ages 18-34) completed an object-based attention task similar to Egley et al. (1994). Participants were asked to identify the orientation
of a target object at one of four ends of two rectangles. The target location was validly cued on 70% of trials. The remaining 30% of targets were
located on either the same object or a different object. As in previous studies, results show the spread of attention across the attended object when no
distractor was present (F(2,34)=8.03, p=.003). However, when a distractor
was present participants showed an effect of cue validity (F(6,102)=3.63,
p=.031), but did not show significant spread of attention across the object.
Participants were not significantly slower when the target was invalidly
cued on a different object as compared to the same object when a distractor
was present (t(17)=-1.52, p=.137). These data indicate that while attention
does spread across objects this phenomenon is not as robust in the presence
of distractors.

A10
THE NEGLECTED LEFT HEMISPHERE: CHRONIC RIGHT NEGLECT
ON A LINE BISECTION TASK Juliana Baldo1, Francesca Fortenbaugh1,2,3,
Krista Schendel1, Lynn Robertson1,2, Nina Dronkers1,4; 1VA Northern California
Health Care System, Martinez, CA, 2Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 3Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, MA, 4Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, CA — Research on visual
neglect has typically focused on the identification of regions within the
right hemisphere which, when damaged, lead to visual-spatial and attentional deficits. However, neuroimaging studies in healthy individuals have
reported bilateral activation in parietal regions during visual-spatial tasks.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

35

Poster Session A
These results, in conjunction with observations that neglect symptoms can
and do occur following left hemisphere damage, suggest a potentially critical role for the left hemisphere in visual-spatial processing. Here, we present the results of 98 chronic left hemisphere stroke patients who performed
a line bisection task as part of the Western Aphasia Battery. Utilizing a
voxel-based lesion symptom mapping (VLSM) approach, we found that a
leftward bias in line bisection (i.e. right-sided neglect) was most critically
associated with a small region of left posterior inferior parietal cortex, at
the superior border of the angular gyrus. This finding remained when we
covaried for the degree of patients’ overall aphasia severity, suggesting that
the result could not be attributed to language impairment. This is the first
large-scale VLSM study of hemispatial neglect in chronic left-hemisphere
stroke patients, and the results demonstrate a critical role of left posterior
inferior parietal cortex in the veridical perception of linear extent. While it
is well established that the most profound and long-lasting neglect symptoms are observed in right hemisphere patients, these results suggest that,
just like strategies for treating visual neglect, it is time for researchers to
draw their attention to the left.

A11
MIGRAINEURS AND THEIR ATTENTION TO VISUAL EVENTS
DURING MIND WANDERING Julia W. Y. Kam1, Marla J. S. Mickleborough2,
Chelsea Eades1, Todd C. Handy1; 1University of British Columbia, 2University of
Saskatchewan — Although migraine is traditionally categorized as a pri-

mary headache disorder, the condition is also associated with pathologies
in visual attentional function that persist in-between headache events.
Namely, relative to controls, migraineurs show both a heightened sensitivity to nominally unattended visual events, as well as decreased habituation responses at sensory and post-sensory (cognitive) levels. Here we used
event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine whether cortical hypersensitivities in migraineurs extend to mind wandering, or periods of time wherein
we transiently attenuate the processing of external stimulus inputs as our
thoughts drift away from the on-going task at hand. Participants performed
a sustained attention to response task (SART) while they were occasionally queried as to their attentional state––either “on-task” or “mind wandering”. We then analyzed the ERP responses to task-relevant stimuli as a
function of whether they immediately preceded an on-task vs. mind wandering report. We found that despite normative heightened visual sensitivities in our migraine group, they nevertheless manifest a reduced cognitive
response during periods of mind wandering relative to on-task attentional
states, as measured via amplitude changes in the P3 ERP component. This
suggests that our capacity to attenuate the processing of external stimulus
inputs during mind wandering is not necessarily impaired by the class of
cortical hypersensitivities characteristic of the interictal migraine brain.

A12
TOP-DOWN INFORMATION FLOW IN AN ALPHA OSCILLATORY
NETWORK DURING VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION ORIENTING Nicolas
Bedo1, Sam M. Doesburg2,3, Lawrence M. Ward1; 1University of British Columbia,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 3University of Toronto — Neuroimaging and

2

lesions studies indicate that visual attention is controlled by a distributed
network of brain areas. The covert control of visuospatial attention has
also been associated with retinotopic modulation of alpha-band oscillations within early visual cortex, which are thought to underlie inhibition
of ignored areas of visual space. The relation between distributed networks
mediating attention control and more focal oscillatory mechanisms, however, remains unclear. We localized brain areas involved in visuospatial
attention orienting using magnetoencephalographic (MEG) imaging and
investigated frequency-specific Granger-type causal interactions among
activated regions using transfer entropy. Deployment of attention to one
side of visual space was associated with greater top-down information flow
in the alpha-band between various brain areas involved in attention control and early visual areas ipsilateral to the attended location. These results
indicate that distributed network interactions mediated by alpha oscillations exert top-down influences on early visual cortex to promote inhibition
of processing for ignored areas of visual space.

2015 Annual Meeting

A13
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VOLUNTARY VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION VARY WITH READING ABILITY Jessica Green1, William Brixius1,
Kristina Drake1, Taylor Ryan1; 1University of South Carolina — Attentional

deficits are common in reading disabilities, including reduced orienting
responses, difficulty suppressing peripheral information, and decreases in
executive function. However, the interaction between reading ability and
attention in individuals without such learning disabilities remains unclear.
Studies of visuospatial attention often report reading-direction biases in
task performance at the group level, with better performance for targets
appearing on the right for left-to-right readers, but individual differences
in these processes have not been examined. Here, we had participants complete a variety of measures pertaining to reading ability, reading habits,
and ADHD, and then perform a classic voluntary visuospatial cueing task
while we recorded their EEG. We then examined the relationship between
individual differences in reading ability and differences in behavioural and
electrophysiological correlates of attentional control. Reading ability correlated with a host of attention-related processes, including hemispheric
asymmetries in sensory processing, amplitude of fronto-parietal control
activity, suppression of the to-be-ignored side of space, and location biases
in target processing. Overall, neural activity diverged for leftward and
rightward shifts of attention for good readers but not for poorer readers,
with downstream consequences for target processing. Our results show
that even within a high-functioning university student population, variability in reading skills can lead to substantial differences in basic attention
skills and their neural correlates.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development &
aging
A14
MENTAL ROTATION FOR ASD AND PERSPECTIVE TAKING FOR
TD IN IMITATION Masahiro Kawasaki1, Hidetsugu Komeda2, Toshiya Murai3,
Yasuko Funabiki3; 1Department of Intelligent Interaction Technology, Graduate
School of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Tsukuba, 2Hakubi
Center, Kyoto University, 3Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University — Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is known to be difficult

to communicate with others. To address the issue about what leads to the
communication disorders, we focused on a movement imitation and compared the performance and neural activity between the ASD and typical
development (TD) subjects. Eighteen TD and 18 ASD subjects participated
in electroencephalograph (EEG) experiments. In the task, both right and
left hands were presented in PC display. Either right or left hand tapped
a key, and then subjects must imitate the movement with the same hand
as soon as possible. Each subject completed 3 sessions. In the first session,
they performed the task without the instruction of the strategy. After that,
we asked subjects about the strategy. In the second and third sessions, they
performed the task with the same and different strategies from the first session, respectively. As the results of the interviews and reaction times, most
ASD subjects used mental rotation where they rotated the representations
of PC’s hands and superimposed them with their hands in their minds. In
contrast, most TD subjects used perspective taking where they superimposed the representation of their hands to PC’s hands from other view in
their minds. Moreover, the ASD subjects’ performance for using different
strategy (third session) was worse than using the same strategy (second
session). EEG results showed the modulations of the frontal activity in the
ASD subjects, which suggested that the ASD subjects used the egocentric
strategy and the frontal executive systems in the movement imitations.

A15
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GESTURES AND LANGUAGE IN
ADULTS WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME Philip Lai1,2,3, Talent V. Dang1,
Ursula Bellugi1, Judy Reilly3; 1The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 2University of California, San Diego, 3San Diego State University — Williams Syndrome
(WS) is a genetic disorder with a unique cognitive profile characterized by
hyper-sociability. Spoken language has been found to be a strength of the
syndrome. One particular mode of communication that has not been inves-

36

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
tigated is the use of communicative gestures in adults with WS. Previous
research in children with WS has found fewer gestures produced than their
peers. This study examines gestures and their complexity in 13 adults with
WS and 10 typically developing (TD) adults. Gestures were coded for unimanual versus bimanual and complexity (simple vs. complex). Complex
gestures were further categorized by movement, hand shape, and orientation. There were no differences in length of interview. The TD group on
average produced almost twice as many gestures as the WS group (p=.05).
Furthermore, the use of unimanual gestures was similar, but the TD group
used more bimanual gestures (p=.01). For complexity, there was no difference in the use of simple gestures, but the TD group produced more
complex gestures (p=.02). A comparison of complex gestures showed no
differences for hand shape, but significant differences in movement (p=.02)
and orientation (p=.01) with the TD group using more. Although very
gregarious, individuals with WS are less likely to utilize communicative
gestures along with their speech. This reduced use of gestures may persist
throughout development in the WS group, as they rely more on the spoken
channel than other aspects of communication.

A16
LOW ANTERIOR CINGULATE THICKNESS ASSOCIATED WITH
IRRITABILITY IN 4-7 YEAR OLD CHILDREN Maria Kharitonova1, Joel
Voss1, Jonathan O’Neal1, Margaret Briggs-Gowan2, Lauren Wakschlag1,3; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 2University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, 3Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL — Severe irritability is both prevalent (occurring in

3% of the general population) and predictive of psychopathology across the
lifespan. Although severe irritability begins in childhood, detailed understanding of its neuroanatomical components and consequences for developmental outcomes are lacking. One possibility is that severe irritability is
associated with abnormal development of prefrontal regions involved in
emotional regulation, including primarily medial prefrontal and anterior
cingulate cortex. Here we examined this hypothesis by analyzing prefrontal structure using MRI in 4.5-7.5 years old children with extremely high
(above 80th percentile; N = 20) and low (below 40th percentile; N=18)
scores on the Temper Loss scale of the Multidimensional Profile of Disruptive Behavior (MAP-DB), which provides an observational measure of
irritability. Cortical thickness of dorsal and rostral right anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) was significantly lower for high versus low temper loss participants, controlling for effects of age (t(34) = 2.5, p = 0.02 for rostral ACC;
t(34) = 2.0, p = 0.05 for dorsal ACC). These findings are consistent with the
growing literature linking ACC to emotion regulation, and advance understanding of the developmental etiology of severe irritability in young children. Follow-up analyses of these data will examine associations between
ACC structure and both symptom severity and performance on a battery of
executive-function tests. These findings add to our growing understanding
of how the structural maturation of the brain relates to developmental and
clinical phenotypes.

A18
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS PREDICTS PREFRONTAL CORTEX
VOLUME ACROSS THE LIFESPAN: A BIG DATA, CROSS-SECTIONAL MRI STUDY Katherine Swett1, Yuankai Huo1, Elyce Williams3, Susan
Resnick2, Bennett Landman1, Laurie Cutting1; 1Vanderbilt University, 2National
Institute on Aging, 3Hunter College — Socioeconomic status (SES) is well-es-

tablished as a critical predictor of many cognitive and clinical outcomes,
including language ability, memory, and cognitive control. Neuroimaging studies have found that across age groups, lower SES is associated
with lower whole brain volume, as well as decreased gray matter volume
(GMV) in regions key to these cognitive deficits: prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and hippocampus. Despite a critical link between SES and these specific
brain structures, no studies to date have done a cross-sectional examination
of SES and PFC volume across the lifespan. In this study, we performed
a cross-sectional analysis of GMV for over 5000 subjects ranging in age
from 5-85. The gray matter segmentation was conducted by a whole-brain
(133 label) multi-atlas segmentation framework, which used the Advanced
Normalization Toolkit (ANTs) with SyN image similarity criteria in registration and Non-local STAPLE in label fusion. Results from age predictions of whole-brain GMV replicated those found by previous groups, with

Poster Session A
increased volume until adolescence, followed by post-adolescent decrease.
In a subpopulation of subjects (n=1950) findings showed that age, sex, and
SES (as defined by education level) significantly predicted at least 20% of
volume in each PFC region of interest, accounting for over 50% of variance
in bilateral middle frontal gyrus. When controlling for age and sex, education significantly predicted more than 5% of variance in superior frontal
gyrus gray matter, and 1-3% of variance in other prefrontal areas. These
findings confirm the critical role of SES in PFC gray matter volume across
the lifespan.

A19
PERCEIVED STRESS AND UNCINATE WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY
IN OLDER ADULTS Christa Watson1, Nihar Patel1, Matthew Wynn1, Joel H.
Kramer1, Brianne M Bettcher1; 1University of California, San Francisco — Chronic,
perceived stress has been linked with negative health outcomes, including
cognitive decline. Recent data has linked cortisol levels with greater diffusivity in the uncinate fasciculus and the inferior longitudinal fasciculus
(ILF) in mildly stressed older men. Limited information exists, however,
on the association between perceived stress and white matter integrity in
older adults and whether this relationship is independent of depressed
mood. 101 normal older adults (Mean Age (SD) = 72.3 (6.3)) underwent a
3.0T MRI diffusion tensor brain scan and completed self-report measures
on depression (Geriatric Depression Scale; GDS) and perceived stress (Perceived Stress Scale, PSS). DTI regions of interest (uncinate: left and right;
ILF: left and right ) were constructed from the JHU ICBM-DTI-81 white
matter labels and mean fractional anisotropy (FA) was extracted using FSL.
Partial correlation analyses between ROI FA values and the PSS were run
with age, education, gender, and GDS as control variables. The PSS was
inversely correlated with FA in both the left and right uncinate, independent of demographics and depression scores (left: r = -.19, p = 0.05; right: r =
-.24, p = .02). The ILF was not significantly correlated with perceived stress
(left: p = .44; right: p = .73). In conclusion, chronic, perceived stress is associated with poorer white matter microstructure in the uncinate in a cohort
of community-dwelling older adults, independent of self-report depressive
symptoms. The uncinate may be differentially associated with perceived
stress given that it connects prefrontal and temporal cortices, regions identified in stress literature.

A20
ALTERED NETWORK CONNECTIVITY IN FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA WITH C9ORF72 HEXANUCLEOTIDE REPEAT EXPANSION. Suzee E Lee1, Anna M Khazenzon1, Andrew J Trujillo1, Christine C Guo1,
Jennifer S Yokoyama1, Sharon J Sha1, Leonel T Takada2, Anna M Karydas1, Nikolas
R Block1, Giovanni Coppola3, Mochtar Pribadi3, Daniel H Geschwind3; 1University
of California, San Francisco, 2University of Sao Paulo, 3University of California,
Los Angeles, 4Mayo Clinic — Hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72
represents the most common genetic cause of familial and sporadic behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). Previous studies show
that some C9orf72 carriers with bvFTD exhibit distinctive atrophy patterns
whereas others show mild or undetectable atrophy despite severe behavioral impairment. To explore this observation, we compared intrinsic connectivity network integrity in 14 bvFTD, 14 sporadic bvFTD, and 14 healthy
controls. Both patient groups included five patients with comorbid motor
neuron disease. Voxel-based morphometry delineated atrophy patterns,
and seed-based intrinsic connectivity analyses enabled group comparisons
of the salience, sensorimotor, and default mode networks. Despite contrasting atrophy patterns in C9orf72 carriers versus non-carriers, patient
groups showed topo- graphically similar connectivity reductions in the
salience and sensorimotor networks. Patients without C9orf72 expansions
exhibited relative increases in default mode network connectivity compared to controls and mutation carriers. Across all patients, behavioral
symptom severity correlated with diminished salience network connectivity and heightened default mode network connectivity. In C9orf72 carriers,
salience network connectivity reduction correlated with atrophy in the left
medial pulvinar thalamic nucleus, and this region further showed diminished connectivity with key salience network hubs. The findings suggest
that bvFTD with or without the C9orf72 expansion shows convergent largescale network breakdowns despite distinctive atrophy patterns. Medial
pulvinar degeneration may contribute to the syndrome in C9orf72 carriers

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

37

Poster Session A
by disrupting salience network connectivity. Task-free functional magnetic
resonance imaging shows promise in detecting early- stage disease may
provide a unifying biomarker across diverse anatomical variants.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
A21
THE ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF UNCONSCIOUS
PROCESSING OF OWN- AND OTHER- RACE FACES Jie Yuan1, Shimin
Fu1; 1Tsinghua University — Neuroimaging and electrophysiological methods

have provided unparalleled access to how race is processed consciously
in human brain. The unconscious processing of race, however, is poorly
understood, especially its neural underpinnings. In two experiments, we
investigated the neural substrates of unconscious processing of own- (Chinese) and other-race (Caucasian) faces using Event-Related Potential. In
Experiment 1, we rendered upright faces invisible with Continuous Flash
Suppression paradigm. After the unconscious section, a conscious section
was conducted as control condition. We found that own-race faces elicited
a smaller P1 and a larger N170 component than other-race faces over the
occipito-temporal sites. The pattern of P1 component could be interpreted
that the other-race faces attract more attention than own-race faces. The
larger N170 effect of own-race faces could be due to more expertise and
experience with own-race members. The conscious condition elicited similar results. To rule out an alternative account that the low level stimulus
differences between own- and other-race faces elicited these effect, we conducted Experiment 2 with inverted faces. The participants had no experience with both inverted own- and other-race faces, meanwhile the physical
properties of inverted faces were identical with upright faces. As predicted,
we didn’t observe any significant results in both unconscious and conscious
conditions. In Experiment 2, we ruled out the alternative account. Together,
we discovered the electrophysiological correlates of unconscious processing of race for the first time. These neural evidences show that race could
not only be processed consciously, but also be processed in our unconscious mind.

A22
SPECIFIC HYPOACTIVATION OF RIGHT TEMPORO-PARIETAL
JUNCTION IN AUTISM AT THE SOCIALLY AWKWARD MOMENTS
OF A SITCOM Peter C. Pantelis1, Lisa Byrge1, J. Michael Tyszka2, Ralph
Adolphs2, Daniel P. Kennedy1; 1Indiana University-Bloomington, 2California Institute of Technology — People with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) often

have difficulty comprehending social situations in the complex, dynamic
contexts encountered in the real world. To study the brain under conditions which approximate naturalistic social situations, we measured brain
activity with fMRI while participants watched a full-length episode of the
sitcom The Office. Having quantified the degree of social awkwardness at
each moment of the episode, as judged by an independent sample of 46
controls, we found that both individuals with ASD (n = 17) and control
participants (n = 20) showed reliable activation of a neural system commonly associated with higher-level social inferences (i.e. the “mentalizing
network”) during the more awkward moments. However, individuals with
ASD showed less activity than controls in a region near right temporo-parietal junction (RTPJ) extending into the posterior end of the right superior
temporal sulcus (RSTS). Further analyses suggested that, despite the freeform nature of the experimental design, this group difference was specific
to this RTPJ/RSTS area of the mentalizing network; other regions of interest showed similar activity across groups with respect to both location and
magnitude. These findings add support to a body of evidence suggesting
that RTPJ/RSTS plays a special role in social processes across modalities
and may function atypically in individuals with ASD navigating the social
world.

A23
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL FACE
LEARNING IN SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER Claudia Schulz1, Julian
Hagemann1, Thomas Straube1; 1University of Muenster — Face perception and
face recognition are crucial abilities for everyday interactions. Interindividual differences in face learning can also be seen in event-related potential
(ERP) correlates of face perception. For people suffering from social anxiety

38

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
disorder (SAD), with about 12% a highly prevalent disorder, faces constitute a relevant, disorder-related category of stimuli. Patients show attentional and interpretational biases; however, it is not yet clear whether they
also display changes in face memory. Moreover, a memory bias could be
related to the emotional expression of the face. Therefore, patients with SAD
and healthy controls (HC) participated in a learning study of emotional
faces (happy, angry, neutral). The EEG was recorded thorough learning
and test. Behaviorally, we observed a main effect of emotion on accuracy,
response times and signal detection parameters, irrespective of participant
group. During learning, we observed P1 and N170 effects of emotion and a
tendency of a group effect. In the test phase, an N250 familiarity effect proceeded to LPC, while effects of emotion and group were only marginally
present in the current data. These data are generally in line with previous
learning studies with emotional faces in healthy controls, but only partially
argue for a memory bias for emotional faces in patients with SAD.

A24
NEURAL SIGNATURES OF BOTH TRAIT AND VALUE LEARNING
GUIDE SOCIAL DECISIONS Leor M. Hackel1, Bradley B. Doll1, David M.
Amodio1; 1New York University — Social life involves learning about others
through positive or negative experiences. However, in social encounters,
people typically look beyond the immediate value of the interaction to
also encode higher-level trait attributes, and both factors may influence
future social behavior. We designed a functional MRI experiment to dissociate value and trait learning in an economic game: participants (N =
31) made choices to play with one of four individuals who could share
money (“Deciders”) or with one of four slot machines. Deciders and slots
were each associated with different degrees of value (absolute amount of
money shared) and generosity (proportion of available money shared),
which were uncorrelated. Computational modeling of behavior indicated
that participants learned both generosity and value information and used
a weighted combination of these to make choices. For both human and slot
trials, reward prediction errors during feedback correlated with BOLD
signal in ventral striatum, as in past work, while generosity prediction
errors correlated with BOLD signal in ventral striatum as well as a broader
set of regions previously implicated in social impression updating (ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, and inferior parietal
lobule; Mende-Siedlecki et al, 2012). Finally, during choice, BOLD signal
in ventromedial prefrontal cortex correlated with an expected value signal
that integrated value and trait knowledge. This work suggests that learning about people through feedback involves the updating of value representations as well as more abstract trait representations—through neural
mechanisms that are not uniquely social—and that the integration of both
learning mechanisms supports social decision-making.

A25
EXTRAPOLATION OF SOCIAL INFORMATION TO PHYSICALLY
SIMILAR INDIVIDUALS CONTRIBUTES TO STEREOTYPING Brandon Levy1, Chris I. Baker1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute
of Mental Health/NIH — Previous evidence demonstrates that social evalu-

ations of a face will transfer to morphed versions of the same face even
when the transformed face is perceived as a new identity (Todorov et al.,
2010). The current study investigated whether this similarity-driven generalization of social information functions at a group level to induce stereotyping. Morphing software was used to create three different groups of
faces with high degrees of within-group similarity. A subset of individuals
from each group appeared in an investment game in which they returned
or kept money invested with them by the participant. Individuals from
one group returned the investment on 80% of trials while those from the
other two groups did so on 50% and 20% of trials, respectively. Participants
then replayed the game, this time choosing whether to invest with novel
individuals from each group while receiving no feedback as to whether
each individual returned or kept the investment. Paired t-tests showed
that the behavior of the individuals seen in the first investment game substantially influenced the frequency with which participants chose to invest
with physically similar individuals in the second game, as well as explicit
trustworthiness ratings of those individuals. This effect occurred despite a
complete lack of information with which to judge the trustworthiness of the

2015 Annual Meeting
novel individuals in the second game, suggesting that information about a
subset of individuals is readily utilized to create group-level stereotypes
that bias evaluations of perceptually similar individuals.

A26
ACTIVATION DURING A FACIAL EMOTION OBSERVE/IMITATE
TASK AND SOCIAL COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE: AN FMRI ANALYSIS USING PARTIAL LEAST SQUARES. Colin Hawco1, Natasa Kovacevic2, Anil Malhotra3, Robert Buchanan4, A. Randal McIntosh2, Aristotle Voineskos1; 1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, 2Baycrest
Geriatric Hospital, University of Toronto, 3Zucker Hillside Hospital, Hofstra North
Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, 4Maryland Psychiatric Research Center — Social
cognition is a fundamental behaviour process. The purpose of the present
study was to examine relationships between neural activation during an
emotional scanning task with performance on social cognitive measures.
Twenty-three healthy participants (age range 18-50) performed a task
intended to engage socio-emotional brain networks. Participants observed
emotional or neutral faces in one scan, while imitating the faces in another
scan during the same session. First, GLM analysis in SPM replicated previous studies using this paradigm, showing bilateral motor and premotor
activity and right dominant activity in the inferior frontal and parietal
cortex (the right fronto-parietal network). Five social cognitive scores were
derived from social cognitive tests (the Penn Emotion Recognition Task,
the Relationships Across Domains task, and the 3 parts of the Awareness
of Social Inference Test). Using a PCA we found that scores on all tests
loaded principally on one component. Factor scores were entered into a
behavioural partial least squares (PLS) analysis calculating relationships
between social cognition and neural activity. There were three significant
latent variables, correlating social cognition to processing emotional faces
while imitating, processing emotional faces while observing, or processing
neutral faces. There were negative correlations between social cognition
and neural activity in extended regions outside the fronto-parietal network
(e.g. anterior frontal, fusiform, anterior cingulate, cerebellum) while both
observing and imitating emotional faces, but a positive correlation in fronto-parietal regions during imitation. This suggests those with better social
cognitive ability may make use of more constrained networks centered
around the fronto-parietal system.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
A27
DISTINCT STRUCTURAL BRAIN CORRELATES OF SELF-FOCUSED
VERSUS OTHER-FOCUSED THOUGHT Carissa Philippi1, Maia Pujara1,
Conrad Gudmundson1, Julia Glueck1, Michael Koenigs1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Neuroimaging studies have consistently implicated a

network of brain regions—medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), posterior
cingulate (PCC), and retrospenial cortex (Rsp)—in thinking about oneself and others. Whereas self-focused thought reliably engages mPFC,
other-focused thought recruits PCC and Rsp. To date, few studies have
investigated the neurostructural basis of self- and other-processing using
performance-based tasks. In the present study, we examined whether performance-based measures of self-focus and other-focus (from a sentence
completion task) predicted cortical thickness in mPFC, PCC, and Rsp in
healthy adults (n=26 with no history of psychiatric or neurological conditions). We found that higher self-focus predicted greater cortical thickness
in mPFC, whereas higher other-focus predicted greater cortical thickness
in Rsp. These results are consistent with previous functional neuroimaging
studies associating activity in the mPFC and Rsp with self- and other-processing, respectively. Furthermore, these data provide novel evidence for
the utility of performance-based measures in elucidating the neural basis of
self-reflection and social cognition. More broadly, given the prevalence of
such impairments in a variety of psychiatric disorders, future work could
examine associations among these psychological processes and mPFC/Rsp
structure and function across different psychiatric disorders (e.g., depression, autism, antisocial personality disorder).

Poster Session A

A28
EMOTIONAL VALENCE MODULATES SELF VS. OTHER ACTIVATION IN MPFC Eric C. Fields1,2, Kirsten Weber3,2, Ben Stillerman2,1, Nathaniel Delaney-Busch1,2, Candida Ustine4, Ellen Lau5, Gina R. Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts
University, 2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Mass. General Hospital,
3
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 4Medical College of Wisconsin, 5University of Maryland — The region of the brain most consistently associated
with self-related processing is the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). While
the mPFC has been argued to be specialized for self-related processing,
it has more often been seen as being part of a broader “mentalizing” network used for thinking about both the self and others. In previous work
we examined the interaction of self-relevance and emotional valence using
ERPs. These studies showed that an early indicator of semantic processing (the N400) is sensitive to positive expectations about the self and that
self-relevance and valence can interact in complex ways to determine how
attentional resources are allocated (as indexed by the late positive component). Building on this work, we were interested in how emotional valence
would modulate the effect of self-relevance in mPFC, and we examined
this question with functional MRI. We used two-sentence social vignettes
in a 2 (Self-Relevance: self-relevant, other-relevant) x 3 (Emotion: positive, neutral, negative) design, e.g.: A man knocks on Sandra’s/your hotel
room door. She/You see(s) that he has a tray/gift/gun in his hand. Results
revealed an interaction effect: there was more mPFC activity to self-relevant than other-relevant positive scenarios, but no effect of self-relevance
on neutral or negative scenarios. Interestingly, this is similar to the pattern
we observed on the N400 component of the ERP. Thus one interpretation
of the present fMRI results is that participants maximally engaged the mentalizing network when they their self-relevant expectations about positive
incoming information were confirmed by the input.

A29
THE NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE
SELF-DISCREPANCY Zhenhao Shi1, Yuqing Zhou2, Shihui Han2; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Peking University — People are intrinsically motivated

to pursue positive self-attributes that they ideally would possess, while
confronting the discrepancy between the actual self and the ideal self
can be frustrating. This is true not only when one reflects on his personal
self-concept, but also when one sees the self as part of a group. Using
functional magnetic resonance imaging, the present study examined the
neural mechanisms of individual and collective actual–ideal self-discrepancy. We scanned 58 Chinese college students (29 female; age = 21.67±2.13)
while they performed individual and collective self-discrepancy judgment
tasks. During the individual self-discrepancy task, subjects evaluated the
discrepancy between their actual self and ideal self in terms of possessing
positive attributes (e.g. “smart”, “brave”) on a 4-point scale (from “very
close to “very discrepant”). During the collective self-discrepancy task,
subjects performed similar judgments regarding the discrepancy between
actual Chinese people and ideal Chinese people. Conjunction analyses
revealed that larger actual–ideal self-discrepancy, both individual and collective, was linked to stronger activations in brain areas related to craving
and negative emotion such as bilateral striatum and anterior insula. The
right striatal activities to individual and collective self-discrepancy were
correlated with each other among those with higher dispositional interdependent self-construal, and those higher in collectivism, but not otherwise.
Our findings suggest common neural substrates for individual and collective self-discrepancy in Chinese. Moreover, collectivistic/interdependent
individuals, compared to individualistic/independent ones, exhibit greater
co-recruitment of these substrates when reflecting on individual and collective self-discrepancy.

A30
I SAW MINE FIRST: SELF-RELEVANCE AS OWNERSHIP IN TEMPORAL ORDER JUDGMENT Grace Truong1, Kevin Roberts1, Cassie Cowie1,
Rebecca Todd1; 1University of British Columbia — How does self-relevance via
ownership affect the way we selectively attend to objects in the environment? Previous research shows that objects owned by the self command
greater levels of attention and are remembered better compared to equivalent objects that are owned by another. However, these measures reflect
post-stimulus responses to ownership status. To investigate whether

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

39

Poster Session A
self-relevance can influence pre-stimulus cognitive processes, we employed
a temporal order judgment (TOJ) task in an object ownership context. We
predicted that self-relevant objects would elicit a prior entry effect: when
two items are presented simultaneously, previously cued or more salient
stimuli are perceived as appearing first, thus reflecting an attentional set
deployed before stimulus onset (Williams et al., 1988). Participants first
learned the arbitrarily assigned ownership statuses of a series of everyday
objects and were tested for recall on these categories until performance was
at ceiling. In the subsequent TOJ task, participants viewed pairs of objects
(one owned by self, one owned by another) presented asynchronously and
reported which appeared first. Results from multi-level logistic regression
showed participants were more likely to perceive self-owned objects first if
presented simultaneously with an other-owned object, suggesting a bias in
initial attentional deployment. Further analysis showed this self-bias was
completely dissociable from degrees of independent and interdependent
self-construal. The current work demonstrates how self-relevance shapes
selective attention, and highlights the distinction between the self as an
object of perception (“Me”) and the self as an experiential agent or subject
of perception (“I”).

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
A31
NEURAL BASIS OF INHIBITING SOCIALLY UNACCEPTABLE LOVE
Ryuhei Ueda1, Hiroshi Ashida1, Nobuhito Abe2; 1Kyoto University Graduate
School, 2Kokoro Research Center, Kyoto University — The neural basis of love

has gradually been delineated in studies using functional neuroimaging
techniques. However, few studies have examined which brain mechanisms
are responsible for inhibiting “immoral” behavior such as cheating or marital infidelity. Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to identify the brain regions contributing to the success and failure of inhibiting socially unacceptable love. During fMRI scanning, thirty-six male
participants were presented with photographs of the faces of (a) attractive
females with a significant other, (b) attractive females without a significant
other, (c) unattractive females with a significant other, and (d) unattractive
females without a significant other. The participants were asked to rate how
much they wanted to be romantically involved with each female using an
8-point scale (from 1 = very negative to 8 = very positive). The participants
rated attractive females higher than unattractive females, and this effect
was associated with activation in the ventral striatum. The participants also
rated females with a significant other lower than females without a significant other, and this effect was associated with activation in the lateral
parietal cortex. Critically, the participants demonstrating willingness to be
romantically involved with females with a significant other over females
without a significant other were characterized by inefficient activation of
control-related prefrontal areas and a heightened sensitivity to reward (as
measured by questionnaires). These results provide a neural explanation
for why some people are willing to engage in socially unacceptable love.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
A32
REFINING A NEUROSCIENCE APPROACH TO PERSONALITY
MEASUREMENT: THE ANPS 3.0 Laura Feren1, Kenneth Davis2; 1Brandman University, Member of the Chapman University System, Irvine, CA, 2Pegasus International, Greensboro, NC — Factor analysis is a driving influence

in personality theory as a personality parsing tool. However, personality
psychology needs a new tool to build on the Big Five base and advance personality theory. Jaak Panksepp has offered a neuroscience approach. Synthesizing anatomical, pharmacological, and physiological brain research,
Panksepp presented evidence for seven primary emotional brain systems,
six of which may provide the foundation for human personality. We call
these six systems SEEKING, ANGER, FEAR, CARE, SADNESS, and PLAY.
Davis, et al. (2003) published the Affective Neuroscience Personality Scales
(ANPS), which measured these six primary emotions. Davis et al. related
these six scales to the Big Five and showed how the Big Five dimensions
did not accurately measure these six inherited emotional systems and their

40

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
influence on personality and psychopathology. Davis & Panksepp (2011)
published the revised ANPS 2.4 to improve scale reliabilities. The ANPS
has been criticized recently (Barrett et al., 2014) in part for low scale reliabilities. The current project improves ANPS psychometrics by expanding
from a 4-point to a 6-point scale, and also adds a Social Dominance scale.
We use factor analysis to suggest that the Behavioral Activation System
(Carver & While, 1994) is not closely related to any of these primary brain
emotions or to Social Dominance but is likely related to an impulsive lack
of approach regulation, and that Spirituality is principally related to the
CARE emotion. We also offer descriptive adjectives for the six Affective
Neuroscience Personality Scales that enhance their verbal descriptions.

A33
SELF-DISTANCING REDUCES VMPFC ACTIVITY DURING
INTER-RACIAL MENTORING INTERACTIONS Jordan Leitner1, Ozlem
Ayduk1, Rodolfo Mendoza-Denton1, Chad Forbes2; 1University of California,
Berkeley, 2University of Delaware — Extant research suggests that White

teachers experience concern that their Black students will perceive them
as prejudiced. Consequently, White teachers may become self-focused
and anxious when giving critical feedback to Black students. One possible way to mitigate this self-focus and anxiety is through self-distancing,
a strategy wherein people view their experiences from an 3rd person perspective. However, it remains unclear whether self-distancing influences
neural processes in regions linked to self-focus and anxiety. In the current
research, White participants adopted either a self-distanced perspective
that discourages self-focused attention, or a self-immersed perspective that
encourages self-focused attention. Participants then conveyed positive and
negative feedback to a Black student confederate while continuous EEG
and coder-rated anxiety were measured. To estimate the neural generators
of EEG activity associated with participants’ feedback to the Black confederate, we conducted source-localization analyses for the -200 to 400 ms
epoch surrounding the delivery of feedback. A dipole model that included
bilateral sources in the motor cortex (to account for hand motions), occipital cortex (to account for visual processing), lateral prefrontal cortex, and
ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) explained 97% of total EEG variance. Bootstrapping path analyses revealed that compared to participants
in the self-immersion condition, participants in the self-distancing condition showed significantly less source waveform activity in the vmPFC
in the 200ms following the delivery of feedback, which in turn predicted
lower ratings of anxiety. These findings suggest that in potentially stressful
inter-racial interactions, self-distancing reduces anxiety by decreasing processing in neural regions linked to self-focused attention.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
A34
SEX DIFFERENCES IN NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES
MODULATED BY IMPULSE CONTROL Kazufumi Omura1, Kenji Kusumoto1; 1Yamagata University — The amplitudes of the N2 and P3 components
of event-related potentials (ERPs) may be related to personality traits such
as impulsivity, and gender may impact these ERP components. However,
there are few studies focusing on the interaction between personality traits
and sex differences. This study evaluated how sex differences in the amplitudes of the N2 and P3 components during a continuous performance task
(CPT) are related to impulse control. Twenty-seven healthy participants
were asked to perform an AX-type CPT (Go/Nogo task) with EEG recording. Participants then completed the Barratt impulsiveness scale, version 11
(BIS-11), and the effortful control (EC) scale to self-report personality measures related to impulse control. We found that males showed significantly
larger N2 amplitudes in the frontal area than females in the Nogo condition. In addition, the N2 amplitude in the Nogo condition was positively
correlated with the BIS attentional subscore, but was negatively correlated
with the EC attentional subscore in males only. Interestingly, the NogoP3, which has been linked to response-related cognitive processes, did not
differ between sexes and there were no significant relationships between
its amplitudes and BIS or EC attentional subscores. These findings suggest
that the Nogo-N2 amplitude, which is modulated by trait impulsivity and

2015 Annual Meeting
executive attention, is more sex-sensitive than the Nogo-P3, and may be
related to sex-specific inhibitory controlling mechanisms during the early
stage of stimulus evaluation.

A35
LARGE-SCALE NETWORK DYNAMICS UNDERLYING LISTMETHOD DIRECTED FORGETTING Babu Adhimoolam1, Teena Moody2,
Barbara Knowlton2; 1University of California San Francisco, 2University of California Los Angeles — Adaptive learning requires motivated or directed forget-

ting of irrelevant information in order acquire new information. Motivated
or directed forgetting has been well studied in the laboratory using the
List method, in which subjects are presented with a list of words and are
then directed to either remember or forget these words. If subjects receive
a forget instruction, they will exhibit better memory for a subsequent list
than if they are instructed to remember the initial list. Here we investigate
the network changes during learning of a second list, after either a Forget
or a Remember instruction. Subjects were 17 healthy young adults scanned
using 3T MRI. By using ROI-ROI connectivity analysis (results corrected
using FDR, p <0.05) we show that seeds in the left inferior frontal and left
middle frontal regions, show anti-correlations with the default mode network (posterior cingulate, precuneus and right angular gyrus) during list
2 encoding following the Forget cue. We also found positive correlations
between seeds in the bilateral frontopolar and dorsolateral part of the prefrontal cortex with the posterior, parietal and anterior nodes of the DMN.
The left inferior frontal anti-correlation with the posterior nodes of DMN
was unique to forget condition and was not seen in remember condition.
These results underscore distinct connectivity signatures between nodes of
DMN with fronto-parietal regions during list 2 encoding during the forget
condition. Our results have important implications to understand directed
forgetting from a network perspective and provide insights into dynamic
network reconfiguration during intentional forgetting and remembering.

A36
VASCULAR RISK FACTORS INFLUENCE PERFORMANCE ON
INHIBITORY CONTROL TASKS MORE THAN AGE IN HEALTHY
ELDERS Alexandra Roach1,2, Samuel Lockhart2,3, Charles DeCarli2; 1University
of South Carolina Aiken, 2University of California Davis, 3University of California
Berkeley — Within the context of normal cognitive aging, there is substan-

tial heterogeneity in cognitive deficit. We examined whether vascular risks
such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, or the presence
of the apolipoprotein E e4 allele (APoE e4), a cardiovascular disease risk
factor more commonly associated with Alzheimer’s disease, affect cognitive decline. We selected three inhibitory control paradigms (Flanker arrow
task, Stroop color-naming task, Go/No-Go task) each designed to engage
slightly different aspects of inhibitory control to help uncover the root of
the heterogeneity observed in age-related cognitive decline. Thirty-nine
young adults (mean age = 24.6), and 40 older adults (mean age = 77.5),
participated. All healthy older adults were recruited from the University of
California at Davis Alzheimer’s Disease Center longitudinal cohort study.
While we found the expected global slowing in reaction time in older compared to younger adults, we found no age-related decline in accuracy on
any task. Amongst the older adults, we found a significant association
between diabetes and all three tasks. Participants with diabetes were significantly slower overall than those free from disease on both the Flanker
and the Stroop tasks. Older adults with diabetes were more accurate on
No-Go trials as a function of number of preceeding Go trials, as their overall slower response time allowed for complete processing of the No-Go
cue, leading to fewer false alarms. For the Stroop task, APoE e4 presence
resulted in global slowing independent of trial type. These findings provide
significant insight into what types of biological influences affect cognition.

A37
COMPARING THE PREDICTED ACTIVATIONS OF AN ACT-R COGNITIVE MODEL WITH HUMAN FMRI BOLD RESPONSE IN A DIFFICULT VISUAL DISCRIMINATION TASK Daniel M. Roberts1,2, George A.
Buzzell1,2, Raja Parasuraman1,2, Craig G. McDonald1,2; 1George Mason University,
Center of Excellence in Neuroergonomics, Technology, and Cognition — Models

2

of human cognition built within a general cognitive architecture, such as
ACT-R, can serve to focus theories of specific aspects of cognition. Forming

Poster Session A
a model within an architecture restricts the flexibility of parameter selection and forces potentially abstract concepts to be made explicit. Models
of human cognition built within cognitive architectures have traditionally
been fit to measures of human behavioral performance, such as accuracy
and response time. However, the behavioral assessment of model fit has
more recently been supplemented by comparing model-generated predictions of neurophysiology to data gleaned from human cognitive neuroscience experiments, using standard neuroimaging techniques [Anderson, J.
R., Fincham, J. M., Qin, Y., & Stocco, A. (2008). A central circuit of the mind.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(4), 136–143]. Here, twenty-four human
participants completed a difficult visual discrimination task in which they
reported both stimulus identity and their certainty of response, while fMRI
was acquired. A cognitive model of the same task was implemented within
the ACT-R cognitive architecture, modeled to fit the behavioral responses
of the human participants. Of particular interest is the timing of activation within ACT-R’s “goal” module, which serves to maintain the model’s
task state and has been previously associated with the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC). The ACC is one region within medial frontal cortex that
was observed to be differentially activated for certain relative to uncertain
perceptual decisions among the human participants. A comprehensive
comparison of the human neuroimaging data and the predicted activation
based on the ACT-R model are presented.

A38
DISENTANGLING NEURAL SUBSTRATES SUPPORTING MEMORYVERSUS CONTROL-BASED CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE CONGRUENCY SEQUENCE EFFECT Jiefeng Jiang1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University
— To achieve goal-directed action, habitual but contextually inappropriate
responses to goal-irrelevant distracter stimuli must be overcome. Resolving conflict from distracters can be mediated by retrieving and applying
an appropriate attentional states (cognitive control), and/or by retrieving
the response associated with similar, previously encountered stimuli from
memory. Behaviorally, both of these processes result in improved conflict
resolution following conflict on the previous trial (the congruency sequence
effect, CSE). To tease apart the neural substrates supporting priming of control states versus that of stimulus-response associations, in producing the
CSE, we analyzed behavioral and fMRI data acquired while subjects (N =
15) performed a prime-probe conflict task. Here, subjects had to ignore a
prime arrow stimulus (pointing either left, right, up, or down) that preceded an image of a face that could be oriented left, right, up, or down,
and the direction of which had to be indicated by the subject. In addition to
manipulating prime-probe congruency, trial sequences could either have
the exact arrow and/or face repeated (identity priming condition), a change
in physical stimuli but not in direction (categorical priming condition), or a
change in both physical stimuli and direction (control priming condition).
Behaviorally, we observed significant CSE in all three conditions. However,
preliminary fMRI results revealed that distinct brain regions were involved
in mediating the CSE depending on whether it represented priming of
cognitive control (anterior cingulate cortex), priming of category-response
associations (posterior parietal cortex))- or priming of stimulus-response
associations (putamen).

A39
CONFLICT ADAPTATION IN BILINGUALS: THE IMPORTANCE OF
BEHAVIORAL DATA IN COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE Oliver Sawi1,2,
Hunter Johnson1, Kenneth Paap1; 1University of Connecticut, 2San Francisco State
University — When studies include both behavioral and neuroscience data,

strong conclusions are sometimes made even when the behavioral evidence
is weak- this practice could prove detrimental to cumulative progress. We
suggest that in at least one controversial research domain (bilingual advantages in executive functioning (EF)), that the behavioral variables are playing, at best, a supporting role to neuroscience data. This diminished attention to the quality of the behavioral evidence often leads to, in our view,
inappropriately strong conclusions. A highly cited study (Abutalebi et al.,
2012), which appears to be a well-balanced synthesis of behavioral and
neuroscience data, concludes that bilinguals adapt to conflict better than
monolinguals - as indexed by differential interference effects across blocks
between bilinguals and monolinguals. However, the behavioral data do not
directly support the conclusion by NHST, parameter estimation, or Bayes
analysis. Furthermore, others have reported either no language-group

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

41

Poster Session A
differences or the reverse pattern. The present study extends the scope of
the protocol described in (Abutalebi et al., 2012) from multiple blocks in a
single session to a second session on another day. 78 participants completed
a flanker interference task similar to the version employed by (Abutalebi
et al., 2012) in two sessions. A factorial ANOVA (with days, blocks, and
trial type as repeated measures, and language group as a between-subjects?
factor) was conducted. There was no evidence supporting the conclusion
that bilinguals adapt to conflict more efficiently than monolinguals; there
were no bilingual advantages on either day, and no interaction of language
group X day.

A40
CONTROL MECHANISMS IN BILINGUAL APHASIA Teresa Gray1,
Swathi Kiran1; 1Boston University — We examined cognitive control (CC) in

bilingual aphasia in order to determine whether deficits in language control (LC) are specific to the language domain or indicative of more general
cognitive deficits. Preliminary data were collected from 10 Spanish-English
healthy bilingual adults (HBA) (M = 48.5; SD = 11.3) and 4 Spanish-English bilingual adults with aphasia (BAA) (M = 40; SD = 10.4). We project
to recruit 20 HBA and 20 BAA. Participants completed a language history
questionnaire and four tasks (two non-linguistic: NL-Flanker, NL-Color/
Shape and two linguistic: LT-Flanker, LT-Triad) designed to evaluate CC
in linguistic and non-linguistic contexts and included both congruent and
incongruent conditions. For HBA and BAA, separate paired samples t-tests
were performed to evaluate the effect of condition (congruent/incongruent)
on accuracy and RT for each task. For HBA, RT results revealed a congruency effect (CE) (i.e., faster RTs on congruent vs. incongruent conditions)
on all tasks, whereas for BAA, no CE was observed (LT-Flanker: HBA: p
< .05, BAA: p = .83; NL-Flanker: HBA: p < .01, BAA: p = .24; LT-Triad:
HBA: p < .01, BAA: p = .33; NL-Color-shape: HBA: p < .001, BAA: p = .07).
No significant differences were found on accuracy, except for the color/
shape task (HBA and BAA: p < .05). Preliminary results suggest that HBA
demonstrate intact mechanisms of LC and CC, whereas BAA results reveal
a lack of CE in LC and CC, indicating impaired control mechanisms in both
domains. All results are indicative of domain general cognitive control.

A41
MODULATION EFFECTS OF EMOTION/MOTIVATION ON
RESPONSE INHIBITION Hsin-Ju Lee1, Wen-Jui Kuo1; 1National Yang-Ming
University — Emotion and motivation are two essential factors to affect the

way we behave. Yet, how our brain reacts in response to the interaction
of emotion and motivation and action control is unclear. In action control
literature, the stop-signal task is a long well-established paradigm to study
action inhibition. It requires the participants to react as fast as possible to
the go cues and to stop the initiated actions as accurate as possible when
stop-signals occur. In this study, by providing a monetary reward in various situations, the two factors, i.e., emotion and motivation, are included to
see how they interact with action inhibition processes. In addition to behavioral measurements, functional MRI was conducted to investigate their
neural substrates. In the results, there was no difference across conditions
in behavior data, which was consistent with previous behavioral findings.
However, the BOLD data showed several interesting findings. First, greater
activation was found in the vmPFC for successful stopping trials (SST) than
unsuccessful stopping trials (USST). The USST showed higher activity than
the SST in bilateral sensorimotor cortex. Compare to the emotional neutral condition, the frontoparietal networks showed higher activation level
by both the positive and negative emotion conditions, suggesting that the
attention control networks were sensitive to the evoked emotional perturbation in our study.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
A42
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN NEURAL OSCILLATIONS UNDERLYING DISTRACTION AND INTERRUPTION Yixuan Ku1,2, Theodore Zanto2,
Adam Gazzaley2; 1The Key Lab of Brain Functional Genomics, MOE & STCSM,
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Psychology and Cognitive Science,

42

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China, 2Department of Neurology, Physiology and Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, USA
— In this study, we assessed age-related neural oscillations underpinning

working memory processes, in the context of interference (to-be-ignored
distractions or to-be-attended interruptions). Both types of interference
deteriorated working memory performance, with older adults exhibiting a
disproportional decline. These performance declines in aging were associated with diminished posterior alpha oscillations as well as less fronto-posterior alpha coherence, suggesting weakened top-down control from the
prefrontal cortex in aging. Although alpha oscillations were observed to
underlie declines in both types of interference, a functional dissociation
was observed such that alpha activity and coherence were affected in aging
prior to distraction and after an interruption, but not vice versa. Additionally, older adults exhibited a decline in disengaging from an interruption,
as indexed by prolonged frontal theta activity, providing further evidence
that deficits in prefrontal cortex cognitive control underlie interference control problems in aging. Together, these results suggest age-related deficits
in working memory performance during interference stems from deficient
fronto-posterior oscillatory alpha and theta activities that serve to inhibit
impending distraction and release temporarily attended interruptions from
working memory.

A43
INFORMATION FLOW IN THE MENTAL WORKSPACE Alexander Schlegel1, Prescott Alexander1, Peter Tse1; 1Dartmouth College — The brain is a vastly
complex and interconnected information processing network. In humans,
this network supports a mental workspace that enables many abilities such
as scientific and artistic creativity. A central theoretical and technical challenge facing neuroscience is to understand the neural basis of such complex cognitive processes. Does information processing underlying these
processes occur in isolated regions or distributed throughout the brain?
How does the flow of information within the network contribute to specific cognitive functions? Current approaches have limited ability to answer
these questions. Here we report novel multivariate methods that enable
analysis of information flow within the mental workspace as participants
manipulate visual imagery. We find that mental representations share a
common format throughout the cortex via the distributed flow of information. Mental manipulation entails distributed processing with sparser
information sharing and flow. These findings challenge existing, modular
models of the neural basis of higher-order mental functions.

A44
GENETIC MODULATION OF CONCUSSION AND FOOTBALL EXPOSURE EFFECTS ON COGNITIVE TASK PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTIONAL NEURAL CONNECTIVITY Eleanna Varangis1, Kelly Giovanello1,2,
Kathleen Gates1, Stephanie Lane1, Kevin M. Guskiewicz1; 1The University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2UNC Biomedical Research Imaging Center —
Recent studies have shown a link between concussions (or subconcussive
episodes) sustained earlier in life and memory problems, dementia, and
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) later in life. However, little is known about individual differences in the long-term effects of concussion, and specifically
whether genetic risk factors for AD, such as the Apolipoprotein-ε4 (APOEε4) allele, may better account for some of these effects or interact with concussion and exposure history to influence cognitive functioning years after
concussive injury. In the present study, participants between the ages of
50-65 (N=63) were classified based on concussion history (0-1 or 3+), football exposure (college or college+NFL), and APOE-ε4 allele status (APOEε4+ or APOE-ε4-). Participants completed two batteries of neurocognitive
tasks, and performed an fMRI-adapted N-back task to assess functional
connectivity during working memory performance. Neurocognitive task
results revealed an overall trend towards specific deficits in the domain
of memory across all sub-groups. Results from the functional connectivity analyses revealed that concussion history accounted for differences in
connectivity strength within a fronto-parietal working memory network.
Additionally, APOE-ε4 status accounted for differences in the magnitude
of functional connectivity strength, specifically in its interaction with both
exposure and concussion history. These findings suggest that the functional neural connectivity observed during working memory performance
is altered by concussion history and the interaction between concussion
history, football exposure, and APOE-ε4 status.

2015 Annual Meeting

A45
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION DIFFERENTIALLY AFFECTS SUBTASKS DURING SIMULATION OF A REALWORLD MULTI-TASK. Melissa Scheldrup1, Jessica Vance1, Eric Blumberg1,
Richard McKinley2, Raja Parasuraman1, Pamela Greenwood1; 1George Mason
University, 2Air Force Research Laboratory — Complex multi-tasks – which

make simultaneous demands on separate cognitive components - are
important for every day functioning as well as many technical occupations.
Improving performance of multi-tasks would benefit from heightening the
cognitive systems that are engaged through training or noninvasive brain
stimulation. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has been used
to facilitate single task performance (reviewed in Coffman et al. 2014), but
only recently used to facilitate multi-tasks (Scheldrup et al., 2014). Performance of multi-tasks requires coordination of attention between subtasks
(Strobach et al., 2014). Based on evidence that dual-task performance is
mediated by a network involving right anterior cingulate and right dorsolateral prefrontal (rDLPFC) cortices (Kondo et al., 2004; Dosenbach et al.,
2007), we hypothesized that stimulation of rDLPFC by tDCS could enhance
performance on a dual-task simulation of aircraft carrier operations - Warship Commander (WSC). WSC is composed of subtasks, one loading verbal
working memory (WM) and another loading spatial WM. Participants were
randomly assigned to sham (n=19), anode (n=18), or cathode (n=18) stimulation over the rDLPFC (contralateral shoulder reference). We found that
the anode over rDLPFC significantly reduced performance on the verbal
WM task compared to the cathode. Errors on the spatial WM subtask were
marginally higher with cathode compared to sham and anode stimulation.
These results indicate that the stimulation induced a processing tradeoff,
such that enhancement of rDLPFC had no effect on spatial WM, while benefiting verbal WM. Inhibition of rDLPFC impaired performance on spatial
WM while conferring a benefit for verbal WM.

A46
THE REPRESENTATIONAL CAPACITY OF THE HUMAN PREFRONTAL CORTEX: A HIGH-RESOLUTION FMRI STUDY Patricia Shih1, David
Badre1; 1Brown University — The prefrontal cortex (PFC) supports complex
behaviors by providing flexible task representations. It has been proposed
that neurons in the PFC that show mixed selective responses combine as
a population to produce distributed representations of all combinations
of task-relevant dimensions. This high-dimensional capacity theoretically
allows any combinatorial mixture of features to be read out in support of
flexible cognitive control. However, it is unknown whether high-dimensional capacity is unique to PFC or is, alternatively, a fundamental and
general computational characteristic of association cortices. Critically,
it is necessary to test whether the high-dimensional capacity observed
in non-human primate PFC is conserved in humans, capable of the most
complex of behaviors without extensive training. Thus, this study aimed to
estimate the dimensional capacity of human PFC and other cortical areas
in the human brain, using a similar pattern classification approach as has
been implemented in the non-human primate. Human participants were
scanned with high-resolution fMRI while performing two-item sequential
memory tasks, adapted from studies in monkeys. We found that many
combinations of task aspects (cues/task-types) were indeed decodable in
distributed voxels within PFC, implicating high-dimensional capacity and
consistent with non-human primate PFC. However, high representational
capacity was observed in additional neocortical areas as well, particularly
within occipital cortex. By contrast, other regions, such as motor and parietal, showed relatively low dimensional capacity, encoding fewer task representations. We consider these results with regard to the functional organization and computational nature of the neocortex – both in PFC and in
the brain more broadly.

A47
FURTHER INVESTIGATION OF EVENT-RELATED ALPHA SYNCHRONIZATION AS INHIBITORY CONTROL DURING A WORKING
MEMORY TASK Christina Merrick1, Tiffany K Jantz2, Ezequiel Morsella1,3, Mark
W Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of Michigan, 3University of
California, San Francisco — Frequencies in the alpha band have traditionally
been regarded as representing an ‘idling’ rhythm that arises when brain

Poster Session A
regions are at rest (e.g., when eyes are closed). Several recent working
memory (WM) studies have challenged this view by demonstrating that
alpha power systematically increases with the number of items held in
WM (Jensen, Gelfand, Kounios & Lisman, 2002; Klimesch, Doppelmayr,
Schwaiger, Auinger & Winkler, 1999). In order to explain this increase in
alpha power, Klimesch, Sauseng, and Hanslmayr (2006) proposed that
event-related alpha synchrony reflects a top down, inhibitory control process. During a WM task, this type of alpha inhibition is present in task-irrelevant brain areas, which may help to prevent distracting information
from interfering with task-relevant information (Klimesch et al. 2006). To
further explore this hypothesis, a WM task was employed that allowed us
to manipulate memory load (2 vs. 4 Letters) and to capture spontaneous
moments of active rehearsal—the component process in which mental representations are activated reiteratively, through intentional, top-down processing (Johnson & Johnson, 2009). In line with the alpha-inhibition hypothesis, we observed increased alpha synchronization in parietal and occipital
areas not involved with the task, but alpha desynchronization in the left
frontal lobe and right medial temporal lobe, areas that may play a role in
verbal WM. In addition, we examined event-related spectral perturbation,
and observed alpha desynchronization, after moments of spontaneous
rehearsal. Our results provide additional evidence that event-related alpha
synchronization plays a functional role in top-down inhibitory control.

A48
THE RELATIONSHIP OF WORKING MEMORY CAPACITY AND
CONFLICT MONITORING: AN ERP STUDY Jason Sattizahn1, Yanli Lin2,
Sian Beilock1, Jason Moser2; 1The University of Chicago, 2Michigan State University — Individual differences in working memory capacity (WMC) reflect

differences in the ability to maintain task-relevant information, especially
during situations involving monitoring conflict between two competing
tasks or stimuli. Conflict monitoring is thought to be largely subserved
by the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), whose activity can be captured
by the response-locked event-related potential (ERP) component known
as error-related negativity (ERN). Yet, little is known about the relation
between variation in WMC and the ERN. We examined the relationship
of participants’ (N=39) trait level of WMC and conflict monitoring as evidenced by the ERN. Participants were administered two complex span
tasks (i.e., operation and reading span), from which we created a composite
working memory score. A tertiary split separated the highest (higher WMC,
N=12) and lowest (lower WMC, N=13) scoring groups. ERN was measured
by recording ERP data during a relatively low WM-demand, two-choice
arrow-based Flankers task, and averaged across participants’ error trials.
Higher WMC individuals showed a decreased ERN amplitude compared
to lower WMC participants despite behavioral performance being equal
between the two groups. On low-demanding tasks, higher WMC participants seem less likely to engage in conflict monitoring compared to their
lower WMC peers. This is in contrast to findings that higher WMC individuals engage in conflict monitoring to a greater extent during more demanding tasks. Higher WMC may be able to more optimally engage conflict
monitoring when needed and disengage when it is not beneficial to a task.

A49
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY AND FILTERING OUT DISTRACTORS:
EVIDENCE FOR AN AGE-SPECIFIC DELAY IN FILTERING Kerstin
Jost1, Ulrich Mayr2, Tina Schwarzkopp1; 1RWTH Aachen University, 2University of
Oregon — The capacity of working memory (WM) varies across individuals

and declines with age. Whereas the ability to filter out irrelevant information has proven critical for general individual differences in visual WM,
other factors seem to be responsible for the age-related differences in WM.
We present data of a series of experiments that support earlier findings of
an age-related delay in filtering. In a visual short-term memory task (i.e.,
change-detection task) targets were presented along with distractors. The
contralateral delay activity of the EEG measured during the retention interval was used to track the number of stored items and to assess filtering
efficiency. The data suggest that older adults do not have a general impairment in filtering, but that efficient filtering is delayed. Moreover, this filtering delay is specific for older adults and is not observed in WM-equated
younger adults. A detailed analysis of early visual potentials reveals that
already during early perceptual selection older adults are less focused
on the targets than young adults. As a result, distractors may initially be

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

43

Poster Session A
encoded into WM, and then need to be suppressed after the fact, during
the course of maintenance. This apparent, early filtering deficit is consistent
with the view that in older adults, proactive control over attentional settings is less efficient than in young adults.

A50
RETROSPECTIVE VERSUS REFLECTIVE MODULATION OF INTERNAL REPRESENTATIONS Bo-Cheng Kuo1, Shih-Kuen Cheng2, Yei-Yu Yeh1;
1

Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taiwan, 2Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan — Recent studies have

shown that retrospective cues can direct attention to bias internal representations in visual short-term memory (VSTM), thereby suggesting a selective
modulation of maintenance-related neural activity. Similarly, refreshing
current attention of previously viewed item modulates the activity in the
areas relevant to the stimulus category. Here we use functional magnetic
resonance imaging to investigate whether retrospective modulation in
VSTM involves categorically specific biasing of neural activity in a manner
similar to that which occurs for refreshing. Participants (N = 18) performed
a cued variant of VSTM task. Two sample stimuli (face and scene) were
shortly presented (each for 800 ms) in randomised order, followed by a
numerical cue (1500 ms) indicating whether to remember (retrospective
cue) or refresh (reflective cue) the first or second stimulus. After a retention
interval (for 6 sec), a test stimulus was presented (for 1000 ms). Participants
were instructed to make a matched or non-matched judgment based on the
cued stimulus for retrospective cues. In contrast, participants were asked
not to make any responses but think back and visualise the cued stimuli
that had just viewed when reflective cues appeared. A no-cue VSTM task
served as a control condition. By presenting retrospective and reflective
cues, we show a similar top-down modulation in scene-selective areas:
enhancing activity for scene stimulus but suppressing activity for face stimulus compared to VSTM control task. Together, our results elucidate that
both retrospective and reflective modulation rely on a common top-down
mechanisms for goal-directed maintenance and refreshing of internal representations.

A51
EFFECTS OF RTMS ON THE EEG SIGNAL ARE MORE PREDICTIVE
OF CHANGES IN RECALL PERFORMANCE THAN STIMULATION
SITE Michael J. Starrett1, Nathan S. Rose1, Adam C. Riggall1, Jason Samaha1,
Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Recently, Zokaei et al.

(2014) showed that repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) can
alter recall precision for the direction of motion in a test of visual shortterm memory (STM). To investigate the neurophysiological bases of these
effects, we repeated their rTMS procedure while simultaneously recording
EEG. Subjects remembered two random-dot kinematogram (RDK) stimuli
(one red, one green; presented sequentially, each for .3 sec plus .1 sec backward mask), then responded to a color-coded recall cue. In each of two
variants of the task, a few sec separated RDK#1 from RDK#2, and RDK#2
from the recall cue. A four-pulse train of 20 Hz rTMS (110% of adjusted
motor threshold) could be applied to either left MT+ (functionally defined)
or left postcentral gyrus (“S1”; intended as an “active control” region). Trial
types (“early rTMS” (following RDK#1), “late rTMS” (following RDK#2),
or “no rTMS”) each occurred unpredictably, with p=0.33. Group-level
time-frequency analyses of the EEG reveal broadband phasic responses to
stimuli, and sustained elevated power in the 10-15 Hz range across both
delay periods. Group-averaged behavior, however, shows no clear effect
of rTMS target (i.e., MT+ vs. S1) or rTMS timing. Instead, within-subject
behavioral variability most closely tracks rTMS modulation of delay-period
activity recorded over MT+, regardless of targeted site. When rTMS has
the effect of “sharpening” the band of elevated delay period activity (e.g.,
narrowing it to 11-14 Hz) we observe higher recall precision; when rTMS
has the effect of desynchronizing delay period activity, in contrast, we see
lower recall precision.

2015 Annual Meeting

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
A52
CROSS MODAL PLASTICITY IN DEAF CHILDREN WITH COCHLEAR
IMPLANTS David Corina1, Shane Blau1, Todd Lamarr1, Laurie Lawyer1, Lee
Miller1, Sharon Coffey-Corina1; 1University of California, Davis — The goal of this
study was to use ERP techniques to assess the presence of cross-modal plasticity in deaf children with cochlear implants. There is concern that under
conditions of deafness, cortical regions that normally support auditory
processing become reorganized for visual function. The conditions under
which these changes occur are not understood. We collected ERP data from
22 deaf children (ages 1 year-8 years) with cochlear implants. Method. We
used an auditory odd-ball paradigm (85% /ba/ syllables vs. 15% FM tone
sweeps) to elicit a P1-N1 complex to assess auditory function. We assessed
visual evoked potentials in these same subjects using an intermittent
peripheral radial checkerboard while children watched a silent cartoon.
This condition was designed to elicit a P1-N1-P2 visual evoked potential
(VEP) response. Using published norms of auditory P1 latencies (Sharma &
Dorman 2006), we categorized deaf children as showing normal (n=14) or
abnormal auditory development (n = 8). Results. Deaf children with abnormal auditory responses were more likely to have abnormal visual evoked
potentials (8/8) compared to deaf children with normal auditory latencies
(3/14). The aberrant responders showed a VEP off-set response that was
larger than the VEP onset response (a pattern opposite of what is normally
observed in VEP studies). VEP data show an unusual topographic distribution with extension to midline site Cz. Conclusion. These data suggest
evidence of cross-modal plasticity in deaf children with cochlear implants.
We discuss the contributions of signed and spoken language experience in
the expression of these results.

A53
TIP-OF-THE-TONGUE STATES ACROSS THE LIFESPAN: DIFFERENT PROBLEMS FOR DIFFERENT AGES? Meredith Shafto1, Cam-CAN2,
Lorraine Tyler1; 1Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
CB2 3EB, UK, 2Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), University of Cambridge and MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge,
UK, www.cam-can.com — One of older adults’ most often reported concerns
are the temporary word finding failures known as “tip of the tongue states”
(TOTs), which are associated with age-related declines in grey and white
matter. However, forgetting words is a common complaint at any age, and
it is unclear if similar processes underpin TOTs at different ages. Word
retrieval requires multiple component processes, including lexical (phonological and semantic) access, cognitive control processes involved during
production failures, and speeded processing underpinning fluent production. We asked whether these components show differential effects of age,
suggesting different causes of word finding failures across the lifespan. To
address this issue, we tested adults aged 18-88 from the Cambridge Centre
for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN) cohort who have structural MRI
scans. We used a range of production measures, including picture naming
accuracy and speed, different types of naming errors, word fluency, and
phonological and semantic priming. Factor analysis provided three naming
components: accuracy, fluency, and lexical access. While increasing values
for all three components predicted lower TOTs, this relationship differed
by age for the different factors: fluency scores predicted TOT rates across
the lifespan; accuracy effects became stronger with increasing age, and lexical access was uniquely predictive of TOTs for older adults. Likewise, grey
matter broadly predicted performance for the fluency component, but was
specific to older adults or lower grey matter for lexical access. Results support previous evidence that age-related TOT increases reflect changes in
lexical access, but that general processes predict TOTs across the lifespan.

A54
POWER AND PHASE SYNCHRONY OF NEURAL OSCILLATIONS
EVOLVE OVER THE FIRST YEAR OF LIFE AND REFLECT PHONETIC
PERCEPTUAL NARROWING Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1, Jarmo A Hämäläinen2,
April A Benasich1; 1Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 2University of
Jyväskylä, Finland. — Perceptual narrowing is a developmental process that
promotes neural representation and efficient processing of sensory informa-

44

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
tion. During the first year of life, as infants build language-specific phonetic
maps, their universal perceptual language abilities progressively narrow
to favor more specific native language processing. To explore the oscillatory mechanisms underlying perceptual narrowing, 6- and 12-month-old
infants born into English monolingual families were presented with native
and non-native syllables differing in voice-onset-time. Dense array EEG/
ERPs were mapped into age-appropriate brain templates. Source modeling
placed dipoles in auditory and frontal cortices. Temporal-spectral analyses were conducted in source space using a 2-50 Hz frequency range over
-300 to 930 ms with 1Hz wide frequency bins and time resolution of 50
ms. Changes in frequency amplitude, as a function of time relative to stimulus presentation (spectral power), and consistency of phase alignment
across trials (synchrony) were evaluated using temporal spectral evolution
(TSE) and inter-trial phase locking (ITPL) respectively. We found less theta
power at 12 months than at 6-months-of-age with greater power in the left
auditory source for native and in right for non-native syllables. To resolve
phonetic differences, 6-month-old infants require a longer period of phase
synchronization (50-400 ms) while at 12 months, a shorter period (50-200
ms) is sufficient. Our results suggest that as phonetic perceptual narrowing
takes place across age, processing of phonetic information becomes faster
and more efficient. Spectral power captures the neural plasticity that occurs
over native specialization and the increase in processing speed is reflected
in more precise phase synchronization.

A55
SPEECH ENCODING IN QUIET AND BACKGROUND NOISE DIFFERS BETWEEN INFANTS AND YOUNG ADULTS: A COMPLEX
AUDITORY BRAINSTEM RESPONSE (CABR) INVESTIGATION
Gabriella Musacchia1,2, Silvia Ortiz-Mantilla1, Cynthia Roesler1, Julie Byrne1,
April Benasich1; 1Rutgers University, 2Montclair State University — The ability to

understand and respond to speech in the first year of life is indicative, and
can be predictive, of later language ability. In order to understand speech,
the listening brain must decode and encode dynamically rich acoustic cues
often in noisy environments. While infant speech perception is quite sophisticated, discrimination of tones in noise and short formant transitions (<40
ms) are not yet fully mature. The complex Auditory Brainstem Response
(cABR) provides an objective measure of subcortical speech processing that
has been shown to successfully gauge speech processing differences associated with both auditory expertise and language disorders. To investigate
the developmental timeline of speech and speech processing in noise, we
tested a group of awake infants in the first year of life and a group of young
adults. Speech stimuli were delivered monaurally at 70 dB via ear insert,
in blocks of quiet and 60 dB background noise. Brainstem responses were
recorded with a standard vertical montage and averaged according to condition. These data are the first to show speech and speech-in-noise brainstem responses in infants. We found differences between infants and adults
in the formant transition period of the speech stimulus in quiet as well as
higher resistance to the degrading effects of noise in the infant sample. Our
results suggest that processing of a subset of speech sounds continues to
develop both during and after the first year, even in typically developing
infants, and that background noise may impact infant perception differently than in adults.

A56
PRESERVED SYNTACTIC PROCESSING AND ITS RELATIONSHIP
TO GREY MATTER INTEGRITY IN THE CAM-CAN COHORT Karen L.
Campbell1, Cam-CAN2, Lorraine K. Tyler1; 1University of Cambridge, 2Cambridge
Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), University of Cambridge and
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge — No one likes a null

result. Nowhere is this more true than in the field of cognitive aging. However, there are certain abilities which do not decline with age. For instance,
we have previously shown that syntactic processing is relatively preserved
(e.g., Tyler et al., 2010), despite the fact that the frontotemporal system
underlying this process shows extensive grey matter atrophy with age. This
raises the question: how does the aging brain accomplish this fundamental
process? The present study addressed this question using a large, population-derived sample (N = 604, aged 18-88) from the Cambridge Centre for
Ageing and Neuroscience (www.cam-can.org). This sample is sufficiently
large and spans a wide enough age-range to enable us to test the generality
of our initial findings of no age difference in syntactic processing, and to

Poster Session A
examine how this ability relates to grey matter integrity within the frontotemporal system. Participants performed a language comprehension task
which measured their sensitivity to syntactic ambiguity and performance
on this task was related to their segmented grey matter images using a
voxel-based morphometry approach. We show that syntactic processing
is indeed not affected by age, and that performance on this task becomes
increasingly dependent on grey matter integrity within middle temporal
regions of the frontotemporal system with age. These findings reiterate that
the aging brain can remain resilient, and in many ways, these resiliencies
are far more challenging and important to explain than the losses.

A57
STATISTICAL LEARNING OF TONE SEQUENCES IN DYSLEXIA
Janani Iyer1, Psyche Loui2; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2Wesleyan University — Individuals with developmental dyslexia (DD) have reading dif-

ficulties despite explicit reading instruction, suggesting possible deficits
with implicit learning. Little is known about the source of the implicit
learning difficulties, or the extent to which these implicit learning deficits
might extend to nonlinguistic domains. Here we disentangle the learning
of event frequency and conditional probability in implicit learning ability
in DD using tone sequences generated from a finite-state grammar in a
novel musical system (Loui et al, 2010). Twelve individuals with DD and
13 matched controls listened to grammatical sequences for 30 minutes. Frequency learning was tested before and after exposure using a probe-tone
paradigm (Krumhansl, 1990). Probability learning was tested post-exposure using two-alternative forced choice tests of recognition and generalization. Results from control subjects showed significant frequency learning,
as indicated by higher correlation with the exposure corpus in post-exposure compared to pre-exposure probe tone ratings (p<0.01). This frequency
learning was not observed for DD participants (p=0.80), suggesting a frequency learning deficit for tone sequences in DD. Both groups generalized
their knowledge of the grammar to identify novel instances above chance
(control: p<0.01; DD: p<0.05), but only controls recognized sequences heard
during exposure above chance (p<0.05). These results extend previous
results on implicit learning deficits in children with DD (Vicari et al, 2003)
to suggest that implicit learning difficulties in individuals with DD may
stem from difficulty with frequency learning but not probability learning.

A58
AGE-RELATED SHIFTS IN HEMISPHERIC DOMINANCE FOR SYNTACTIC PROCESSING Michelle Leckey1,2, Kara D. Federmeier1,2; 1University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2The Beckman Institute for Advanced Science
and Technology — Recent findings have shown that syntactic anomalies elicit

a left hemisphere P600 event-related potential (ERP) response alongside a
right hemisphere N400 effect in a young adult sample with no history of
familial sinistrality. Given that the aging literature has documented a tendency to change from asymmetry of function to a more bilateral pattern
with advancing age, 24 older adults (age 60+) underwent EEG recording
whilst making judgments on simple two-word phrases. Whereas the left
hemisphere P600 response remained in the older adult sample, the N400
effect was no longer present and instead the right hemisphere also elicited
a P600 response. Together these findings suggest that, as with many other
cognitive functions, syntactic processing becomes more bilateral with age,
with the right hemisphere being capable of the same type of processing
as the dominant left hemisphere. The possibility that this more bilateral
functioning is due to a decrease in interhemispheric inhibition across the
lifespan is discussed.

LANGUAGE: Other
A59
A “FAST” FMRI LOCALIZER OF COMPONENT PROCESSES IN
READING Jeffrey Malins1, Nina Gumkowski1, Bonnie Buis1, Peter Molfese1,
Stephen Frost1, Ken Pugh1, Robin Morris2, Einar Mencl1; 1Haskins Laboratories,
2
Georgia State University — Our primary aim was to develop an fMRI local-

izer of orthographic, phonological, and semantic components of word reading that is both relatively brief and also sensitive to individual differences.
On each trial, subjects are rapidly presented with a set of four printed items,
in a sequential fashion (stimulus duration, 250ms; ISI 200ms). Trials con-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

45

Poster Session A
sist of real words, pseudowords, or a false font of letter-like symbols. Sets
of real words are semantically related (FORK/DISH/SPOON/BOWL),
orthographically related with consistent phonology (BOAT/COAT/
GOAT/FLOAT), orthographically related with inconsistent phonology
(BOMB/TOMB/COMB/WOMB), or unrelated in orthographic, phonological, and semantic properties (CLAY/LAWN/FLEA/VASE). We tested this
protocol with a group of adult typical readers (N = 19) using a 3T scanner; subjects completed four functional runs each five minutes in length.
Analyses uncovered several brain regions with a well-established role in
reading: (1) a contrast between unrelated words and false font isolated the
visual word form area in the left fusiform gyrus; (2) pseudowords showed
greater activation than unrelated words in left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG);
(3) bilateral IFG showed sensitivity to the consistency of mappings between
orthography and phonology; and (4) left IFG and parahippocampal areas
were sensitive to semantic similarity. Furthermore, brain-behavior analyses
revealed that the extent to which individuals recruited these regions was
related to reading performance outside of the scanner. These results suggest this protocol is not only a powerful tool for localizing component processes, but is also sensitive to individual differences in the reading circuit.

A60
EMOTIONAL BALANCE? INFERENCES IN LEFT AND RIGHT HEMISPHERES Connie Shears1, Adriana Ariza1, Jay Kim1, Erika Sam1; 1Chapman
University — Conflicting theoretical perspectives posit hemisphere differences for processing emotional language (Smith & Bulman-Flemming,
2006; Beeman, 1993). We examined hemisphere differences for the formation of causal inferences based on texts that were positive, neutral, or
negative, to test whether the right hemisphere (favored for inferences and
emotions) would form more causal inferences than the left hemisphere
(favored for word recognition and categorization). Utilizing a divided-visual-field paradigm, responses to target words were measured in four
experiments. Experiment 1 measured responses to target words that were
related to inferences relative to explicit text targets; Experiment 2 modified inference-relative targets to be valence-inconsistent; and Experiments
3 and 4 modified the texts to be present, rather than past, tense. Interactions
between valence and formation of inferences depended upon hemisphere.
Despite the theoretical suggestions that emotional language and inference
formation should combine to produce right over left hemisphere advantages, results demonstrated a division of labor across valences. Findings
suggest the left hemisphere may be as important to inference formation as
the right hemisphere when positive emotions are being processed.

A61
THE EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED SIMILARITY AND TRAINING ON
NOVEL SPEECH ACQUISITION: AN FMRI STUDY Victoria Wagner1,
Pilar Archila-Suerte1, Ferenc Bunta1, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of Houston — The current study sought to understand brain plasticity in adults

associated with acquiring novel speech sounds of differing perceived similarity to native speech. English monolinguals underwent training session
for native and novel bi-syllabic nonwords of varying perceived similarity
while undergoing fMRI. Neuroimaging data was analyzed using ROIs
based on previous literature. Overall, more similar stimuli elicited greater
activation than less similar stimuli in bilateral caudate, left Heschl’s gyrus,
bilateral insula, right middle temporal gyrus, and bilateral putamen. Looking at the effects of training, there was greater activation for more similar
compared to less similar stimuli in bilateral caudate, left Heschl’s gyrus, left
insula, right MTG and bilateral putamen, at the beginning of training while
there was no difference for the final segment of training. Looking at the
effect of training within the levels of similarity, more similar stimuli elicited
greater activation in right STG at the beginning of training compared to
the end of training. Investigating the effects of training on the less similar
stimuli, there was greater activation at the end of training in right caudate,
left insula, and bilateral putamen compared to the beginning of training,
suggesting that participants were in the process of engaging new motor
speech commands for these sounds. These results suggest that perceived
similarity affects the neural recruitment involved with the acquisition of
novel speech sounds.

46

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

A62
PERFORMANCE ON HIGHER-LEVEL LANGUAGE TASKS FOLLOWING LEFT ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX LESION Venugopal
Balasubramanian1; 1Seton Hall University — Does the left anterior cingulate
cortex play a role in higher-level language functions? The current study
attempts to answer this question. Method: Subject. JG, a 64 year-old male
with a medical history of intracerebral hemorrhage induced lesion to the
anterior inferior medial frontal lobe, and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
served as the subject. Procedure: Clinical evaluation revealed moderate
impairments in orientation, visual perception, verbal learning, and immediate and delayed memory for stories, and normal performance on Boston
Naming Test, and low normal range in sentence comprehension on Token
Test. The experimental tasks utilized in this study targeted higher-level language: Discourse Comprehension Test (DCT), Discourse production task
(DPT) which involved immediate recall of propositions from the stories
presented, and Linguistic Ambiguity Comprehension Test which assessed
comprehension of lexical (LA), surface structure (SSA), and deep structure
ambiguities (DSA). Results: JG’s overall scores of 16 on the DCT was well
below the scores (37.4) reported for normal controls, on DPT task his recall
of the propositions in three stories has ranged between 0% and 20%, and
on LACT, JG’s scores were as follows: LA= 5, SSA = 3, and DSA = 1 which
were well below the scores reported for normal controls (LA =10, SSA =
7.75, and DSA= 9.50). These results seem to offer support for the potential
role of ACC in higher level language. This conclusion finds support in the
emerging approach to the ‘networks of brain’ (Sporn, 2011) that allocates a
central position to the ACC within the network.

A63
WHAT’S YOUR FUNCTION NARRATIVE CONJUNCTION?
EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIALS TO NARRATIVE CONJUNCTION IN SEQUENTIAL IMAGE PROCESSING Neil Cohn1, Marta Kutas1;
1
University of California at San Diego — Visual narratives using sequential
images often depict successive images with different characters, thereby
requiring these images to be “conjoined” into a larger spatial environment
containing all the characters (1). We used event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) to determine whether these patterns require processing beyond that
when characters are not involved in this type of narrative conjunction. Congruous Non-Conjunction sequences depicted a visual narrative starting
with frames showing two characters, followed by a critical panel repeating
the image of only the second character (i.e., [AB][AB][B]… with letters representing characters). Congruous Conjunction sequences showed the first
character in one frame, then the second character in the next ([AB][A][B]…).
Incongruous Non-Conjunction sequences started with different characters,
then changed characters in the critical panel ([AC][AC][B]…), while incongruous Conjunction sequences began with two characters, showed the
first character, then switched to a different character in the critical panel
([AC][A][B]…). An anterior negativity was greater to critical Conjunction
panels than to Non-Conjunction panels, regardless of congruity. In addition, a posterior P600 was larger to panels in Conjunction sequences than
Non-Conjunction sequences, and larger to incongruous sequences than
congruous ones. Finally, regression analysis indicated that the anterior negativity effect was modulated by participants’ frequency of reading Japanese
comics growing up, consistent with corpus research showing this pattern
more in Japanese than American comics (2). Thus, the comprehension of
this narrative construction is modulated by fluency in specific “visual languages.” 1. N. Cohn, Cognitive Science, 2013. 2. N. Cohn, et al. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2012.

A64
PHONOLOGICAL SELECTION WITHIN POSTERIOR LEFT FRONTAL
CORTEX Malathi Thothathiri1, Michelle Rattinger1; 1George Washington University — Selecting and ordering speech sounds is a crucial component of language production. Based on prior evidence linking the left frontal cortex to
selection and language processing, we hypothesized a role for this area in
phonological selection. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we
examined activation within a priori regions of interest (ROIs) to investigate
sub-specialization. ROIs included posterior frontal regions associated with
sequencing and phonological processing (BA 6, 44/6, 44/6/9, BA 44), and
an anterior frontal region associated with controlled language processing

2015 Annual Meeting
(BA 45/47). Participants (N=14. Mean age=22.13) covertly described visual
scenes that depicted transitive actions involving two characters (e.g. “the
surfer chased the surgeon”). In the baseline comparison condition, they
covertly named single characters. We manipulated phonological onset
overlap between nouns during the critical trials (Overlap: surfer, surgeon.
Non-overlap: surfer, gymnast). Previous behavioral research suggests that
onset overlap generates interference during multi-word production. We
hypothesized that the resolution of such interference would require phonological selection, leading to greater activation in the overlap than the
non-overlap condition. Results showed significantly greater activation for
overlap versus non-overlap in the BA 6, BA 44/6, BA 44/6/9 and BA 44
ROIs but not in the BA 45/47 ROI (p’s<.05). Whole-brain analyses (uncorrected voxel p<.001) corroborated these results. These results suggest
sub-specialization within left frontal cortex whereby posterior portions,
specifically near the prefrontal/premotor junction, may be involved in phonological selection. Damage to this region may impair the ability to select
and sequence phonological representations, offering a potential explanation for production deficits in aphasia.

A65
NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROBABLISTIC CATEGORY LEARNING
IN APHASIA Sofia Vallila-Rohter1, Swathi Kiran1; 1Boston University — Prob-

abilistic category learning has been extensively researched in cognitive
neuroscience in order to better understand the processes and mechanisms
engaged in learning (Ashby & Maddox, 2005). Despite major advances in
our understanding of category learning, however, little remains known
about probabilistic category learning in post-stroke aphasia and its consequence on language relearning in these individuals. Only recently has
research explored category learning in patients with aphasia, demonstrating
that some patients show intact category learning while others do not (Vallila-Rohter & Kiran, 2013). In the current study, therefore, we used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to better understand the neural mechanisms engaged in nonlinguistic category-learning in patients with aphasia
(PWA). Four PWA and three control participants completed our study. In
a feedback-based task, participants learned to categorize fictional animals.
Animals were established along a continuum based on the percentage of
features shared with each of two prototypes. A perceptual-motor baseline
required participants to determine whether animals appeared alone or
in a pair. Behavioral analyses revealed that two profiles of learning arose
among PWA and controls: learners and nonlearners. Behavioral differences
were reflected in differential neural engagement during learning. Learners
in both groups were found to produce few clusters of activation (Training
> Baseline). Of particular interest, PWA engaged right middle frontal gyrus
(MFG) and right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Control learners recruited IFG
bilaterally. Nonlearners produced patterns of diffuse activation bilaterally
in frontal, temporal and visual regions, suggestive of increased effort, monitoring and executive functioning throughout learning.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
A66
SEMANTIC MEMORY DEFICITS IN TBI PATIENTS: AN FMRI AND
MVPA ANALYSIS Fanpei Gloria Yang1, Tracy L Luks2, Sara LaHue2, Pratik
Mukherjee2, Peng-Yu Chen1; 1National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan,
University of California San Francisco, USA — Research has reported that

2

patients with mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) suffer from impaired verbal
memory using measures of neuropsychological testing. Verbal memory
deficits might arise from failure in semantic control. The present study
aims to study the semantic network in TBI patients in semantic competition
and use an alternative fMRI analysis method, multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA), by using machine learning algorithm based on radial basis
function (RBF) kernels to the classification of healthy controls and patients
with TBI. Sixteen controls (12 males, 4 females, mean age=28.25, SD=7.56)
and Nineteen patients (14 males, 5 females, mean age=31.27, SD=9.45) participated in the study. Subjects were asked to decide whether words in a
pair were related, indicating their decision by pressing the buttons. Each
trial contained the first pair as a probe, the second pair as a target, and a
focal point. We had three conditions: consistent, inconsistent, and control.
All image processing was performed using SPM5. We selected beta values
of region of interest (ROI), left middle frontal gyrus (LMFG), left inferior

Poster Session A
frontal gyrus (LIFG), left precentral gyrus, left parahippocampul gyrus,
left precuneus and thalamus, as the features for training the classifier. We
found that when using the RBF kernel with all features, MVPA proved
capable of discriminating at above-chance levels between healthy controls
and patients with TBI. Additionally, using the RBF kernel with features
only from left middle frontal gyrus and left inferior frontal gyrus performs
better than former. The results suggested that MVPA can be used to distinguish the patients from healthy controls. The patients’ worse performance
of semantic competition might mainly result from the dysfunction of LMFG
and LIFG.

A67
CLOSE, BUT NO GARLIC: PERCEPTUOMOTOR AND EVENT
KNOWLEDGE ACTIVATION DURING LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION Ben D. Amsel1, Katherine A. DeLong1, Marta Kutas1; 1University of California, San Diego — Recent research has shown that language comprehension

is guided by knowledge about the organization of objects and events in
long-term memory. We use event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to determine the extent to which perceptuomotor object knowledge and event
knowledge are immediately activated during incremental language processing. Event-related but anomalous sentence continuations preceded by
single-sentence event descriptions elicited reduced N400s, despite these
words’ poor fit within local sentence contexts. Anomalous words sharing
particular sensory or motor attributes with contextually expected words
also elicited reduced N400s, despite being inconsistent with global context (i.e., event information). We show that this perceptuomotor-related
facilitation is not due to lexical priming between words in the local context and the target, or associative or categorical relationships between the
expected and unexpected targets. Exploratory analyses were consistent
with non-identical time courses and neural generators of object and event
knowledge activation. We also showed that performance on the category
fluency test accounts for significant variance in the timing and amplitude
of N400 expectancy effects. Overall our results suggest that perceptual and
motor object knowledge and generalized event knowledge are immediately
available to constrain expectations about upcoming language input.

A68
AM I LOOKING AT A CAT OR A DOG? TAXONOMIC INTERFERENCE
IN THE EYE MOVEMENTS OF PATIENTS WITH PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA. Robert Hurley1, Marsel Mesulam1, Wei Huang1, Joel Voss1,
Emily Rogalski1, Mustafa Seckin1; 1Northwestern University — Object naming

and word comprehension impairments are common in neurodegenerative
language disorders, known as Primary Progressive Aphasias (PPA). Loss of
word meaning in PPA is associated with taxonomic blurring: words such
as “dog” and “cat” are still recognized as referring to animals, but are no
longer differentiated conceptually, resulting in coordinate errors in matching words to objects. In this study we used eye tracking methods to investigate how comprehension deficits in PPA affect verbally-cued visual search.
Participants were shown noun cues followed by an array of 16 objects, and
were tasked with pointing to the relevant object. The array included the
target object and 15 foils that were either taxonomically related or unrelated to the target. Nine PPA patients with impaired word comprehension,
6 PPA patients with preserved comprehension, and 14 age-matched controls completed the study. Patients with comprehension impairments spent
a disproportionate amount of time viewing related foils, an effect which
was not present in the patients with preserved comprehension. This effect
was primarily driven by a tendency for poor comprehenders to direct gaze
back and forth, repeatedly, between a set of related foils on each trial. This
suggests patients were accumulating and weighing evidence for a probabilistic rather than definitive mapping between the noun and several candidate objects. In contrast, controls and “good comprehenders” almost never
directed gaze back to a previously-viewed foil. Neurodegeneration in PPA
thus appears to distort word-to-object pathways prior to severing them,
causing uncertainty in naming and recognition.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

47

Poster Session A

A69
EFFECTS OF SEMANTIC CONTEXT ON PROCESSING QUANTIFIER
SCOPE AMBIGUOUS SENTENCES Veena Dwivedi1, Leslie Rowland2, Kaitlin Curtiss1; 1Brock University, 2McGill University — In previous behavioural and
ERP work we proposed that quantifier scope ambiguous (QSA) sentences
of the form Every kid climbed a tree were processed using a shallow, heuristic mechanism. That is, readers did not interpret QSA sentences using
algorithmic rules to disambiguate whether just one tree was climbed, or
several. RTs/ ERPs for disambiguating continuation sentences such as The
tree(s) was/were in the playground did not differ empirically from their
controls. In contrast, other works have shown a preference for the singular continuation, which is the interpretation expected if QSA sentences are
interpreted using algorithmic rules. Perhaps participants did not deeply
process QSA sentences because every, which is a context-dependent quantifier, was previously presented without context. In the current self-paced
reading study, 30 participants read 3 sentence discourses; first, a pre-context sentence such as The kids spotted the park during the long walk, followed by QSA context sentences (Every kid climbed a tree), and as in previous work, these were followed by either plural or singular continuation
sentences. The hypothesis was that the addition of a pre-context sentence
would result in greater attention in interpreting every, followed by deeper
processing of the rest of the sentence. This would result in ‘algorithmic first’
processing. If so, then on-line RTs would reflect differences between the
singular continuation and its control. Instead, preliminary results reveal
that the addition of the pre-context sentence did not change the RT pattern
as compared to previous work, suggesting that heuristic first processing is
a general processing strategy.

A70
TRACKING LEXICAL AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION WITH ITEM-LEVEL
MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS Elizabeth Musz1, Sharon L. Thompson-Schill1; 1University of Pennsylvania — In order to comprehend a sentence

that contains a homonym, readers must select the ambiguous word’s contextually appropriate meaning. We used item-level analyses of multi-voxel
patterns to track the outcome of this ambiguity resolution, by measuring
the similarity between neural patterns evoked by two distinct meanings
of the same word. We first scanned subjects while they read sentences
that biased the interpretation of homonyms toward their most frequent,
dominant meaning (e.g. money bank), and then measured the multi-voxel
patterns evoked by each homonym. We then presented subjects with the
same homonyms, but in sentence contexts that biased the interpretation
toward a subordinate, less common meaning. For these subordinate-biased
sentences, we also manipulated the relative location of the disambiguating information: the resolving context either preceded the homonym (prior-subordinate; e.g., “river…bank”), or followed it (delayed-subordinate;
e.g., “bank…river”). A whole-brain searchlight analysis revealed that in
bilateral inferior frontal gyrus, the delayed-subordinate and dominant
patterns were more similar than the prior-subordinate and dominant patterns. Follow-up analyses reveal that this effect may be partly driven by
greater mean responses for delayed-subordinate than prior-subordinate
items. Additionally, in left inferior temporal gyrus, the strength of each
homonym’s meaning dominance predicted the similarity between the
dominant-biased and subordinate-biased homonym patterns, regardless of
context position. These findings demonstrate the use of item-level, similarity-based analyses to measure the activation of contextually inappropriate
word meanings.

A71
DO SENTENTIAL CONSTRAINT AND WORD EXPECTANCY EXERT
SEPARABLE EFFECTS ON EYE MOVEMENTS DURING READING?
Kara D. Federmeier1, Mallory C. Stites1, Edward W. Wlotko2; 1University of Illinois, 2Tufts University — An eye-tracking study was conducted to investigate
the separable contributions of sentential constraint and expectancy (cloze
probability) on reading times. These two factors have been shown to have
different effects on event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited during reading
(Federmeier, Wlotko, De Ochoa-Dewald, & Kutas, 2007), but eye-tracking
work has previously confounded them (Rayner & Well, 1996). The current
study employs the stimuli from Federmeier et al. (2007), in which sentences
with strong or weak constraint were completed with expected or unex-

48

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
pected (but plausible) words, the latter of which were critically matched for
cloze probability across contexts. Findings revealed a graded effect of cloze
probability on target word reading times, with no additional effect of constraint, replicating N400 patterns elicited by these stimuli. Overall sentence
reading times were differentially inflated in strong constraint contexts with
unexpected endings, mirroring the frontal positivity these stimuli also
elicit. This parallel effect could index reinterpretation of the sentence triggered by the unexpected word. Analyses at an individual item level reveal
correlations between ERP amplitudes and reading times on those words.
This novel analysis strategy gives us the unique ability to identify relationships between brain electrical activity elicited during word-by-word sentence reading and their behavioral consequences in a different set of readers, which could help to identify the currently underspecified functional
role of the frontal positivity effect.

A72
IDENTIFYING THE COGNITIVE LOCUS OF DEFICITS IN CONNECTIVITY DURING LEXICO-SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN AUTISM
Emily Coderre1, Barry Gordon1,2, Kerry Ledoux1; 1Cognitive Neurology/Neuropsychology; Department of Neurology; Johns Hopkins University, 2Department
of Cognitive Science; Johns Hopkins University — Language deficits are a core

symptom of autism spectrum disorders (ASD), particularly semantic integration of linguistic stimuli. However, semantic integration of non-linguistic stimuli such as pictures is not affected. This disassociation suggests
that semantic processing is intrinsically intact in ASD but lexico-semantic
connections are selectively disrupted. Such deficits may be associated with
underconnectivity of long-range brain networks, such as those connecting
language and semantic areas, in ASD compared to normal controls (NCs).
We compared event-related potentials (ERPs) and electroencephalographic
(EEG) coherence, a measure of neural synchronization, between high-functioning individuals with autism (HFAs) and NCs during semantic integration of pictures and words. We predicted similar N400 effects (larger
negative amplitudes for unrelated than related stimulus pairs) between
groups for pictures, but a smaller N400 effect for words in HFAs vs. NCs.
We predicted similar coherence patterns in the theta band (associated with
semantic processing) between HFAs and NCs for picture stimuli, reflecting
intact visuo-semantic processing; but reduced left fronto-parietal coherence
relative to NCs for word stimuli, reflecting impaired connectivity between
lexical and semantic areas. NCs showed similar N400 effect magnitudes
and theta coherence patterns for words and pictures. HFAs showed a larger
N400 effect and greater centro-parietal theta coherence for pictures than for
words. In group comparisons, HFAs showed smaller N400 effects than NCs
for both pictures and words, but greater fronto-parietal theta coherence
than NCs for words. The increased fronto-parietal coherence but smaller
N400 effects for HFAs could suggest reduced efficiency of this functional
connection during lexico-semantic integration in ASD.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
A73
CORTICAL REACTIVATION DURING MENTAL REPLAY IN AMNESIA Marie St-Laurent1, R. Shayna Rosenbaum1,2, Rosanna K. Olsen1, Bradley R.
Buchsbaum1,3; 1Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest, 2York University, 3University of Toronto — Neural reactivation occurs when patterns of brain activity

elicited during event perception are reinstated at retrieval. It is assumed
that reactivation takes place when a memory representation is vivid and
specific. Several studies have applied Multivoxel Pattern Analysis (MVPA)
to functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to quantify neural
reactivation in healthy populations. However, MVPA’s potential as a tool
to quantify memory impairment in clinical populations is relatively unexplored. With the current study, we used MVPA to assess the quality of
memory representation in an individual with developmental amnesia due
to a stroke that affected diencephalic structures. We tested NC, an individual with developmental amnesia, and 19 healthy age-matched controls
on an fMRI task during which they viewed and mentally replayed a set of
11 short videos multiple times. We first used a pattern classifier trained
and tested on independent sets of retrieval trials. NC’s classification was
normal on this measure, indicating that, despite his amnesia, his patterns
of brain activity at retrieval were just as consistent and stimulus-specific as

2015 Annual Meeting
those of controls. We used a second classifier, however, that was trained on
perception trials and tested on retrieval trials in order to quantify neural
reactivation. NC’s classification on this measure was lower than classification in any of the controls, indicating that his patterns of brain activity were
not modeled on activation patterns evoked during perception to the same
extent as in controls. Our results demonstrate that MVPA can be used to
quantify reduced memory specificity in single clinical cases.

A74
DISSOCIABLE HIPPOCAMPAL NETWORKS ARE ENGAGED IN
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL DURING EVENT GENERATION AND DETAIL ELABORATION. Signy Sheldon1, Brian Levine2,3;
1

McGill University, 2Rotman Research Institute, 3University of Toronto — While it

is clear that the hippocampus is critical for autobiographical memory (AM),
it is unclear how the hippocampus interacts with cortical regions to support
different aspects of AM retrieval, namely the search for a memory (construction) versus the detailed re-experiencing of that event (elaboration).
Given recent findings that anterior and posterior segments of the hippocampus support different mnemonic processes, we considered this question by investigating the different contributions of anterior/posterior hippocampal networks to AM construction and elaboration. We also compared
these contributions to constructing and elaborating on non-episodic information. fMRI data was collected as 27 participants were cued to retrieve an
AM (construction) and then recover the associated episodic details (elaboration). In two non-episodic conditions, they were cued to retrieve and
elaborate on a specific spatial location or features of an imagined object.
During the AM construction phase, the left anterior hippocampus was preferentially connected to a pattern that included the angular gyrus, inferior
temporal gyrus and anterior prefrontal cortex. During AM elaboration, the
left posterior hippocampus was associated with a connectivity pattern that
included posterior neural regions such as the posterior cingulate, the precuneus and visual association cortices whereas the left anterior hippocampus
was associated with a pattern that included the bilateral inferior and superior temporal gyri. Distinct patterns of anterior and posterior hippocampal connectivity also emerged for the two non-episodic conditions. These
findings are discussed in the context of the processing requirements during
critical aspects of AM retrieval and hippocampal functional specialization.

A75
OBESITY IN VETERANS IS ASSOCIATED WITH CHANGES IN HIPPOCAMPAL MORPHOLOGY Michael V. Stanton1,2, Salil Soman1,2, Tong
Sheng1,2, J. Kaci Fairchild1,2, Jordan M. Nechvatal1,2, Ansgar J. Furst1,2, Maheen
M. Adamson1,2, Peter J. Bayley1,2; 1VA Palo Alto, 2Stanford University — Obesity

has been associated with a number of cognitive impairments in humans
including deficits in executive function and memory. However, the literature is limited on how these deficits are mediated by specific brain regions.
One suggestion is that obesity may be related to hippocampal dysfunction.
Accordingly, we explored the relationship between hippocampal morphology and obesity in a sample of Veterans (N=110, mean age = 46.74, SD =
11.51, 97 males) among whom excess weight is a major health problem
(nationally, 78% are either overweight or obese). We used clinical interviews and self-report instruments to obtain health-related data. Hippocampal subfield volumes were obtained from structural MRI images using
Freesurfer segmentation processing. Regression models were run, predicting values of hippocampal subfields from body mass index (BMI) while
adjusting for sex, age, intracranial volume, presence of posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), and presence of depression (Beck Depression Inventory).
Results showed that BMI predicted greater width of the left hippocampal
fissure (p<.05). A trend was also found for greater BMI to predict a reduced
right CA1 hippocampal volume. In conclusion, obesity may be associated
with changes in hippocampal morphology and a reduction in the volume of
certain hippocampal subfields. These brain alterations may have negative
implications for cognitive performance, specifically memory performance
among obese and overweight veterans.

Poster Session A

A76
AN FMRI STUDY OF PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL PROCESSING DURING MEMORY ENCODING Wei-Chun Wang1, Roberto Cabeza1;
1

Duke University — Recent work indicates that medial temporal lobe regions
traditionally thought to subserve episodic memory may also be critical
for perceptual discriminations. The current study seeks to investigate 1)
whether such effects extend to conceptual discriminations and 2) whether
medial temporal lobe regions that support perceptual and conceptual discriminations also relate to subsequent memory. Twenty healthy participants completed study-test blocks in an fMRI scanner. The encoding task
consisted of a triplet odd-one-out face or word discrimination task and
the retrieval task consisted of a recognition memory test for either faces
or words. Preliminary analyses indicate that, for both perceptual and conceptual discriminations, activity in frontal regions increased as a function
of task difficulty. On the other hand, temporal regions – particularly the
anterior medial temporal lobes – negatively related to task difficulty. Furthermore, these frontal and medial temporal regions partially overlapped
with regions showing subsequent memory effects for both faces and words.
These results indicate that frontal and temporal regions subserve both the
on-line processing of perceptual and conceptual information as well as the
subsequent recognition of this information.

A77
WHOLE-BRAIN CHANGE IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH SUCCESSFUL AND UNSUCCESSFUL RECOLLECTION Danielle King1, Marianne de Chastelaine1, Rugg Michael1; 1Center for Vital
Longevity and School of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas at
Dallas — Previous studies have demonstrated that functional connectivity
between distinct brain regions increases as a function of recollection success (e.g., King et al., under review; Schedlbauer et al., 2014; Watrous et al.,
2012). For instance, in one study, regions that showed increased activity
during successful relative to unsuccessful recollection also demonstrated
enhanced recollection-related changes in connectivity with a widely distributed set of brain regions (King et al., under review). However, previous analyses investigated changes in connectivity with only a limited set
of brain regions that are known to play a role in episodic memory. Here,
we examined recollection-related changes in connectivity throughout the
entire brain. Participants were scanned during an associative recognition
task. Separate psychophysiological interactions (PPI) analyses were conducted for 90 seed regions (defined by the AAL atlas) to estimate changes in
functional connectivity associated with successful and unsuccessful recollection. For each seed region, the mean parameter estimate of connectivity
change associated with both successful and unsuccessful recollection was
extracted for each of 90 target regions, which were then entered into two
separate whole-brain seed-target connectivity matrices. We then applied
Graph Theory metrics to characterize whole-brain network properties associated with successful and unsuccessful recollection. The results of these
analyses demonstrated significant differences in the patterns of wholebrain functional connectivity associated with successful and unsuccessful
recollection. Specifically, the networks differed in terms of the overall density of connections, as well as the regions that showed the greatest change
in functional connectivity during successful or unsuccessful recollection.

A78
BASE RATE MANIPULATIONS INDUCE MODULATIONS WITHIN
THE POSTERIOR PARIETAL CORTEX Amy Frithsen1, Michael Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara — Previous work has shown that activity
within the dorsal posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is modulated by changes
in base rate information. When the probability of an old item is high, criterion levels are laxed and activity is attenuated. Conversely, when the probability of an old item is low, criterion levels are increased and activity is
augmented. While this result has been reproduced within the dorsal PPC
areas, it is not yet clear if the same modulation holds true for the more ventral PPC subregions. In order to test this claim, we had twenty subjects take
a remember/know test while in an fmri scanner. Subjects were correctly
told that during the likely condition 70% of the test items were old and that
during the unlikely condition only 30% of the items were old. Responses
were separated according to condition and response type (remember and
know). Behavioral results showed a modest, yet statistically significant
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

49

Poster Session A
shift in criterion with subjects adopting a relatively more strict criterion
in the unlikely compared to the likely condition. This was most evident
for know responses. Neural results replicated (although to a lesser magnitude) a modulation in dorsal PPC activity between condition, with the
superior parietal lobule (SPL) more active during the unlikely condition.
For the ventral PPC regions, the reverse pattern was observed. Specifically,
ventral activations tended to be greater in the likely condition. These results
are discussed in terms of how they may be related to theories as to how this
area contributes to memory retrieval.

A79
CATEGORY-SPECIFIC PATTERNS OF RECOGNITION MEMORY
SIGNALS IN PERIRHINAL AND PARAHIPPOCAMPAL CORTEX Chris
Martin1, Stefan Köhler1,2; 1Brain and Mind Institute, Western University, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest Centre — A substantial body of research has iden-

tified item-based recognition memory signals in perirhinal cortex (PrC) that
can be observed even in the absence of recovery of episodic context. Recent
fMRI evidence suggests, however, that parahippocampal cortex (PhC) may
also carry such signals for items from specific visual categories. The stimulus dimensions that determine whether item-based memory signals are
localized in PrC or PhC remain unknown. Evidence obtained in non-mnemonic tasks suggests that PhC may specifically represent objects that are
large in real-world size and stationary - properties that make them relevant as potential landmarks for navigation. Here we employed multi-voxel
pattern analysis of fMRI data to investigate the impact of object mobility
on recognition-memory signals in the medial temporal lobe. To address
this issue we examined patterns of activity in PrC and PhC related to recognition memory for buildings (stationary), trees (stationary), and planes
(mobile). During scanning, participants discriminated between previously
studied and novel items. To minimize any influence of contextual information we excluded trials in which participants reported recollection. In right
PhC, we observed patterns of activity that allowed us to classify recognition decisions for buildings and trees, but not planes. By contrast, in right
PrC we were able to classify recognition decisions only for planes. Our findings confirm that both PrC and PhC carry item-based recognition memory
signals (devoid of context). Moreover, these data suggest that mobility is
a critical determinant as to whether category specific memory signals are
localized in PrC or PhC.

A80
ERP SUBSEQUENT MEMORY EFFECTS DIFFER BETWEEN INTERITEM AND UNITIZATION ENCODING TASKS Siri-Maria Kamp1, Regine
Bader1, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland University — In the “subsequent memory

paradigm”, brain activity is recorded during the encoding phase of a
memory experiment. In the analysis, trials are sorted into those that are
associated with successful retrieval in the memory test and those that are
not. Contrasting these trial groups reveals brain activity associated with
successful encoding and subsequent retrieval. The ERP components that
are most frequently reported as exhibiting “subsequent memory effects”
are the P300 and the (typically) frontally distributed slow wave. However,
to date, a clear characterization of the circumstances under which each
subsequent memory effect is observed is missing. We tested the hypothesis that the P300 subsequent memory effect is observed during unitization encoding, while the frontal slow wave effect occurs in an inter-item
encoding condition under otherwise matched study phases of a recognition
memory experiment . Forty-two participants were presented either with
word pairs together with a definition that allowed to combine the word
pairs to a new concept (unitization encoding), or together with a sentence
frame (inter-item encoding). Performance on the recognition test did not
differ between encoding conditions. The frontal slow wave subsequent
memory effect was observed in both encoding conditions, but the parietal
(P300) subsequent memory effect occurred only in the unitization encoding condition. We propose that the P300 subsequent memory effect occurs
when the components of an association are integrated in a single configuration and form a unitized representation, while the frontal slow wave effect
reflects processes more generally involved in associative encoding.

2015 Annual Meeting

A81
LARGE-SCALE FUNCTIONAL NETWORK ORGANIZATION DYNAMICALLY CHANGES ACROSS AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY
RETRIEVAL PROCESSES Cory Inman1, G. Andrew James2, Katherine
Watts3, Stephan Hamann1; 1Emory University, 2University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 3National Institutes of Health — Autobiographical memory (AM)

retrieval involves the orchestration of multiple cognitive and neural processes that evolve over an extended time period, including memory access
and subsequent elaboration. Previous neuroimaging studies have contrasted memory access and elaboration processes in terms of regional brain
activation and connectivity within coordinated multi-region networks
rather than between specific regions like the hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex (PFC). Using fMRI, we tested the hypothesis that early, access-related
retrieval processes would primarily recruit fronto-temporal connectivity
involved in memory search processes and later, elaboration-related processing would primarily recruit occipito- and fronto-parietal connectivity
involved in imagery and working memory processes. Healthy adults generated specific AMs to personal cue words in a pre-scan session and were
later cued to retrieve the AMs during scanning. We used moving-window
cross-correlation and graph theory analyses to examine dynamic changes
in the strength and organization of connectivity among regions involved
in AM retrieval. Consistent with our hypotheses, dynamic cross-correlation analyses revealed a stronger fronto-temporal network during the early-access period and stronger occipital- and fronto-parietal connections in
later-elaboration periods that persisted throughout retrieval. Whole brain
graph theory analyses revealed that the right ventrolateral PFC and left
anterior hippocampus were more central to integrating distributed information early in retrieval, while the bilateral occipital cortices were increasingly more central during late-elaboration periods. These findings provide
evidence that accessing and reconstructing memories from one’s personal
past involves specific, dynamic changes from more anterior to posterior
connectivity as an autobiographical memory is accessed, selected, elaborated upon, and maintained in working memory.

A82
FUNCTIONAL AND STRUCTURAL DIFFERENCES IN THE ANTERIOR
HIPPOCAMPUS UNDERLYING IMPAIRED ASSOCIATIVE ENCODING IN OLDER AS COMPARED TO MIDDLE-AGED ADULTS Kristin
Nordin1, Jonas Persson1, Elna-Marie Larsson2, Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Uppsala University Hosptial, Uppsala, Sweden — Epi-

sodic memory performance often decreases with age, especially for associative memory. The anterior hippocampus is frequently engaged during
associative encoding, and is also the part of the hippocampus that shows
age-related reductions in volume. Although much is known about differences between young and old adults, less is known about those in middle
age, when cognitive and cerebral changes are starting to occur. Here we
scanned middle-aged and older adults (40-50/60-70 years old) during deep
encoding and recognition of word-pairs. The middle-aged group’s superior
performance was not reflected in more hippocampal activity overall, neither during encoding or retrieval, but in more left anterior activity during
successful encoding. During successful recognition, on the other hand, the
older group showed activity in the right posterior hippocampus not present in the middle-aged. Structurally, left anterior hippocampal volume was
greater in middle-aged than old participants and volume within this region
correlated positively with performance across age groups. This suggests
that the commonly observed associative deficit in older adults is due to
impaired anterior hippocampal function during encoding, which, in turn,
is mediated by age-related atrophy, and that more hippocampal engagement is required during successful recognition, possibly as a compensatory
mechanism.

A83
TRANSCRANIAL DCS STUDIES EXAMINING THE ROLE OF THE
PARIETAL CORTEX IN RECOGNITION Denise Pergolizzi2, Elizabeth F.
Chua2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2Brooklyn College, CUNY — We previously

found that transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the parietal
cortex increased false recognition when false recognition was relatively
high. Here, we first asked if parietal stimulation increased false recognition

50

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
when rates were low. Participants received parietal (2 mA; n=18), prefrontal (2 mA; n=18), or sham (n=18) tDCS during an item and source recognition test, which had low rates of false recognition. Kruskal-Wallis tests
showed that the mean ranks for false recognition differed between groups
(p<0.05; parietal = 21.17, prefrontal = 26.06, and sham = 35.28), but not true
recognition. Contrary to our previous findings, post-hoc tests revealed this
to be driven by lower false recognition for parietal compared to sham participants, p<.05. One possibility for these differences for high and low rates
of false recognition is that contextual cues from the experiment interact
with mnemonic functions of the parietal cortex. To examine this, we randomly presented external cues at test, which validly predicted upcoming
memoranda as old or new 75% of the time. Participants received parietal (2
mA; n=16), prefrontal (2 mA; n=15), or sham (n=17) tDCS during test. Preliminary results from an ANCOVA model revealed, when controlling for
baseline recognition, the parietal group integrated cues marginally more
than sham (p<.098) during validly cued hits, but less than frontal (p<.05).
The parietal group showed marginally increased performance compared to
frontal (p<.051) but decreased compared to sham (p<.09) during invalidly
cued correct rejections. This provides preliminary evidence that the parietal
cortex may integrate external cues into recognition judgments.

A84
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING AND
DELAYED RETRIEVAL PREDICTED BY WHITE MATTER CONNECTIVITY Kylie H. Alm1, Ashley Unger1, Tehila Nugiel1, Hyden R. Zhang1, Tyler M.
Rolheiser1, Vanessa Troiani2, Ingrid R. Olson1; 1Temple University, 2Geisinger
Autism and Developmental Medicine Institute — There are striking individual

differences in the ability to learn and later retrieve information. It is possible that behavioral variability can be explained by white matter variability.
Two candidate tracts are the uncinate fasciculus (UF) and the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF). The UF connects the anterior/medial temporal lobes to orbitofrontal cortex and has been implicated in episodic and
semantic memory retrieval (Metzler-Baddeley et al., 2011). The IFOF connects extrastriate cortex with lateral/orbital frontal cortices and has been
implicated in semantic memory retrieval (Duffau, 2013). However, interpretation of these literatures is clouded by testing of older and disordered
populations and an over-reliance on neuropsychological tests. We used
diffusion tensor imaging in 17 neurologically normal adults. Participants
performed an associative learning task where they learned face-landscape
pairs over the course of 400 trials. After a 30 minute filled delay, there was
a surprise recognition test. Tractography was performed to compute axial
diffusivity (AD) and mean diffusivity (MD) of the UF and IFOF. There was
a significant relationship between performance on the associative learning
task and microstructural integrity of the left UF (p = .04), as well as a marginally significant relationship with the left IFOF (p = .07). After the delay,
memory performance continued to be related to UF microstructure (p =
.02), but not IFOF microstructure (p = .31). These findings suggest that both
the UF and IFOF play a role in the initial learning of associations; yet, only
the UF is important for facilitating the delayed retrieval of such associations.

A85
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF MEMORY INTRUSIONS Robin Hellerstedt1, Mikael Johansson1, Michael C. Anderson2; 1Lund
University, 2University of Cambridge — Involuntary retrieval of unwanted episodic memories is a core symptom of posttraumatic stress disorder. With
an aim to investigate the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying such
intrusions, electrophysiological measures of brain activity were recorded
while the participants engaged in a think/no-think task. The left hand
word (stimulus word) of previously encoded word pairs was presented in
green or red font. The participants were instructed to think of the associated right hand word (response word) when the stimulus word was presented in green (think condition) and to avoid thinking of the response
word when the stimulus word was presented in red (no-think condition).
The participants rated the extent to which they thought of the response
word in the end of each trial. These ratings were used to contrast intrusion
trials to non-intrusion trials within the no-think condition. Intrusions were
predicted to be reflected in a left parietal positivity, an ERP correlate of recollection. Surprisingly, the ERP results revealed that this recollection effect
was absent for intrusions, indicating that this component reflects controlla-

Poster Session A
ble retrieval processes. Intrusions were instead related to a central negative
slow wave 600-750 milliseconds post stimulus presentation. Similar negativities have been related to working memory maintenance, so this effect
may reflect activation of the response word in working memory. Consistent
with this interpretation, a similar effect was present in the think condition.
The duration of the effect was shorter for intrusions, suggesting that the
participants managed to purge the intruding response word out of working
memory in the no-think condition.

A86
CONTENT-SPECIFIC NEURAL CORRELATES OF MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Amie N. Doidge1, Edward L. Wilding1, Lisa H. Evans1; 1Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre, School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
UK — The sensitivity of event-related potentials (ERPs) to content-specific

episodic retrieval is not well established. There is good evidence to suggest
that memory for faces exhibits a different neural signature than memory
for words. Mixed results, however, have been obtained from studies with
memoranda other than faces. One confound in many of these studies is that
memory accuracy has not typically been matched. In the absence of this,
any difference between neural activities could be due to relative task-difficulty. Here, ERPs were acquired in a memory task where piloting determined that the accuracy of memory judgments was equivalent for visually
presented words encoded under two conditions. At study, words were followed either by a visual image of the item denoted by the word or a blank
screen, which prompted participants to imagine the denoted item. A signature of successful episodic retrieval was present over left-parietal scalp
between 500 and 800ms post-stimulus for both conditions. An additional
anteriorly-distributed modulation in the same time period was evident for
imagined items only. These data provide strong evidence to suggest relative task-difficulty is not responsible for content-specific indices of successful episodic retrieval. One possibility is that this anterior modulation is
sensitive to the recovery of operations engaged when items were encoded.
This interpretation gains support from the frontal distribution of this modulation, alongside data suggesting that lateral and medial anterior prefrontal cortex have similar functional properties.

A87
BOUNDARY CONDITIONS FOR PREPARATORY RETRIEVAL PROCESSING Angharad N. Williams1, Lisa H. Evans1, Edward L. Wilding1; 1Cardiff
University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK — In several event-related potential (ERP) studies of pre-

paratory retrieval processing, neural activity associated with preparing for
episodic retrieval is more positive-going at right-frontal sites than activity associated with preparing to complete tasks with no episodic demand.
This activity has been proposed to index retrieval mode, which is a task set
that ensures stimuli are treated as cues for episodic retrieval. This effect
has been observed in experiments requiring frequent switches between two
tasks. In contrast to the general task-switching literature, however, limited
attention has been paid in ERP memory studies to design elements which
might influence how people can prepare for episodic retrieval. Here, the
factors of the predictability of task-switching requirements and time to prepare were manipulated. When the sequence of the cue that signalled which
task to complete was predictable, and the interval between participant
response and the next cue (response-cue interval, RCI) was 1200ms, there
was no evidence for an ERP index of retrieval mode. This index was evident, however, when the task-cue sequence was unpredictable and the RCI
was 500ms. Moreover, it was evident following the task-cue on the first trial
of a given task only (switch trials), contrasting with several previous findings where it was evident only on the second successive trial of the same
task (stay trials). These findings highlight the need to consider design factors to constrain explanations for when preparation for episodic retrieval is
enabled, and, consequently, to understand the benefits that preparation for
episodic retrieval affords.

A88
PARAMETRIC TRUE AND FALSE MEMORY CONFIDENCE EFFECTS
IN VISUAL REGIONS AND PREFRONTAL CORTEX Sarah Kark1, Scott
Slotnick1, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Prior work has reported
increased activation in visual processing regions and prefrontal cortex
(PFC) during true and false memory (Chua et al., 2004; Slotnick & Schacter,
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

51

Poster Session A
2004). The present study extended this research by examining how visual
activity and PFC activity tracked subjective confidence in true and false
memory judgments. During fMRI, thirteen participants (aged 19-35) studied line-drawing outlines of photos, followed by the complete photo. Participants were then shown outlines of the previously studied and new photos
and asked to make an old-new recognition judgment and a sure-unsure confidence rating. Parametric modulation analyses were conducted to examine
how activity in visual regions and PFC varied as a function of confidence
during true and false memory. Activity in late visual regions (BA19/37)
showed a significant positive modulatory effect of confidence ratings for
both hits and false alarms (FAs), and a conjunction analysis confirmed that
these regions tracked confidence for both true and false memories. While
the parametric Hits>FAs contrast revealed a stronger parametric relation
in the ventral visual pathway (BA20), the FAs>Hits contrast revealed no
activity in the ventral visual pathway but a stronger parametric relation in
the left lateral PFC (BA9). These findings demonstrate shared underlying
visual activity (BA19/37) may support subjective memory experience for
true and false memory, suggesting a general role in memory confidence.
These results also indicate a sensory signature in BA20 specific for increasing confidence in veridical memories, while activity in lateral PFC appears
to be specific for increasing confidence in illusory memories.

A89
THE UPS AND DOWNS OF REPEATED STUDY: AN FMRI INVESTIGATION OF COMPETITIVE MEMORY INTERFERENCE Zachariah
Reagh4, Elizabeth Murray4, Michael Yassa4; 1Department of Neurobiology and
Behavior, 2Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, 3Center
for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 4University of California, Irvine —
Many theories assume that repeated study enhances memory representations. We recently proposed Competitive Trace Theory (Yassa & Reagh,
2013), an account of how hippocampal computations can influence memory
representations. One hypothesis arising from this theory is that repetition
of an identical stimulus can induce highly similar but not perfectly overlapping memory traces, which can compete for representation during retrieval.
This would result in enhanced recognition of the information at the cost
of diminishing episodic details. We demonstrated behavioral evidence
for this effect in a recent publication (Reagh & Yassa, 2014). The present
study replicated this behavioral outcome of enhanced target recognition
and diminished similar lure discrimination with stimulus repetition, and
utilized fMRI to investigate the neural mechanisms of this tradeoff. Toward
this end, we developed a novel high-resolution fMRI scanning sequence
(1.8mm isotropic voxels) that captures the medial temporal lobes similarly
to our prior work, but also includes most of the frontal and parietal cortices.
We demonstrate evidence for a dynamic interplay among hippocampal and
neocortical regions with repeated study events and subsequent memory
judgments over these items. We take our findings as support for Competitive Trace Theory. We furthermore posit that repetitions of a stimulus may
speed up consolidation processes via competitive interference, leading to a
strong semantic trace but diminished episodic details for a given memory
representation.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
A90
FILLING OR KICKING THE BUCKET: CONTROLLED SEMANTIC
RETRIEVAL IS RELATED TO MICROSTRUCTURAL CHANGES
IN LONG-RANGE FIBER PATHWAYS. Ingrid Olson1, Kylie Alm1, Tehila
Nugiel1, Ashley Unger1, Molly Split1, Tyler Rolheiser1; 1Temple University — In
everyday conversation, we make many rapid choices between competing
concepts and words in order to accurately convey our intent. Coherent
communication is made possible by a complex language processing system
that requires us to interpret sensory input, access our semantic memory,
then select the concepts and words that will best carry out communication.
Intraoperative stimulation studies in patients with gliomas have implicated
a uniquely human white matter tract called the inferior fronto-occipital
fasciculus (IFOF) in semantic retrieval (Duffau, 2013). The IFOF connects
extrastriate cortex to lateral/orbital frontal cortices. Here, we used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in a cohort of neurologically normal young
adults to further investigate the relationship between this tract and seman-

52

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
tic processing. Deterministic tractography was performed to compute the
fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) of the IFOF. A control
white matter tract believed to play a role episodic memory, the uncinate
fasciculus (UF; see Alm et al., this conference), was also examined. In the
semantic retrieval task (Snyder et al., 2010), participants were presented
with a series of nouns and asked to generate the first verb that came to mind
for each noun. Nouns were manipulated in terms of retrieval demand,
indexed by association strength and reaction time. Our results revealed a
significant relationship between semantic retrieval and IFOF microstructure, but not UF microstructure. These results indicate the IFOF not only
plays a role in language processing, but is also specifically involved in the
computations required for accurate, controlled semantic retrieval.

A91
PANTOMIMING OBJECT USE DECOUPLES FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN TEMPORAL AND PARIETAL TOOL-SELECTIVE AREAS Frank E. Garcea1,2, Bradford Z. Mahon1,2,3; 1Department of Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, 2Center for Visual Science,
University of Rochester, 3Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester
Medical Center — The ability to manipulate a tool according to its function

requires the integration of visual, conceptual, and motor information, a
process subserved in part by left parietal cortex (LPC). However, it remains
poorly understood how LPC integrates these disparate types of knowledge
during conceptual processing and object use. Here we used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and functional connectivity analyses
to study parietal representations of manipulable objects during task-based
and resting state fMRI. In Experiment 1, participants viewed pictures of
tools, animals, faces, and places in a category localizer experiment; voxels
in LPC were clustered according to their patterns of functional connectivity
with regions in the temporal, occipital and frontal lobes that also exhibited
differential BOLD responses for tool stimuli compared to the other object
categories. One cluster, in the inferior and lateral portion of LPC, expressed
privileged functional connectivity to the motor system. A second cluster,
in the anterior IPS, expressed privileged functional connectivity to ventral and lateral temporal cortex. A third cluster in superior parietal cortex
expressed privileged functional connectivity to dorsal occipital cortex. In
Experiment 2, we measured the degree to which task modulations altered
the patterns of functional connectivity documented in Experiment 1. We
found that functional connectivity between LPC and the ventral stream
selectively decreased during object use pantomiming. These findings indicate that object use pantomiming decouples temporal-parietal functional
connectivity, and outline a framework that generates novel predictions
about the causes of some forms of upper limb apraxia.

A92
AN EXAMINATION OF MEMORY CONSOLIDATION DURING SLEEP
USING AUDITORY WORD PAIRS Jessica Creery1, Robert Hurley1, Ken
Paller1; 1Northwestern University — Sleep has been shown to be important for
memory consolidation, although the mechanisms by which memories can
be strengthened during sleep are not well understood. A powerful way to
examine these mechanisms is through auditory stimulation during sleep,
which can reactivate memories without producing arousal from sleep.
Prior studies showed that Targeted Memory Reactivation (TMR) with
sounds associated with prior learning can strengthen memories for cued
information compared to memories for uncued information (reviewed by
Oudiette & Paller, 2013). Sound cues can also provide a time-locking event
for when reactivation presumably happens during sleep. We designed the
current study to seek electrophysiological signs of memory processing
during sleep, such as N400 potentials, which are known to reflect semantic
processing with words. During an evening session, 16 participants learned
60 related and 60 unrelated word-pairs (e.g., table-chair, bike-ocean). Next,
participants slept overnight, and 30 unrelated word-pairs were presented
repeatedly during stage-2 and slow-wave sleep. After participants awoke,
they took a recall test followed by a recognition test. EEG recordings
throughout the experiment tracked sleep physiology and also allowed an
examination of specific brain potentials to word pairs presented during
wake and during sleep. We compared recall and recognition of the 30 cued
pairs to the 30 uncued pairs. The memory benefit for cued words over
uncued words was related to electrophysiological signals elicited in associ-

2015 Annual Meeting
ation with cue presentations during sleep. Thus, we were able to use TMR
during sleep to provide leverage on identifying electrophysiological signals
relevant for memory reactivation.

A93
PUN COMPREHENSION: NEURAL BASIS FOR MAKING SENSE OF
DOUBLE MEANINGS Peng-Yu Chen1, Fan-pei Gloria Yang1, Fan-pei Gloria
Yang1, Sachien Sharma2, Ari Bernstein2, Navid Khodaparast2, Daniel C. Krawczyk2,3; 1National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 2The University of Texas at
Dallas, 3UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas — A pun is a play on words

that uses different meanings or similar sounds of words to cause deliberate confusion. Previous research on figurative language processing (metaphors, irony, jokes) often suggested right hemisphere (RH) plays a special
role in non-literal language processing. Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) research also reported RH involvement in anomalous sentence processing. The present study used event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging to investigate the brain region involved in processing
puns and non-meaningful sentences. Furthermore, determined whether we
can distinguish between pun and non-meaningful sentences using multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA).Sixteen participants (10 females, 6 males)
read either puns (Math teachers have lots of problems), literal (Math teachers have lots of students), or non-meaningful sentences (Math teachers have
lots of door handles) and had to press buttons with both thumbs when they
finished reading the sentences. All image processing was performed using
SPM5. We used beta values of many ROIs involved in processing puns and
non-meaningful sentences for training the classifier. We found that the
combination of right superior medial frontal gyrus, right insula, left inferior
temporal gyrus and left angular gyrus is distinguish the two kinds of sentence better than chance and other combinations of ROIs. This result supports the point that comprehension of puns and non-meaningful sentences
are involved different regions. The 4 regions we selected finally might be
the critical difference when subjects processed the two kinds of sentence.

A94
DIFFERENTIAL REPRESENTATION OF INFORMATION IN HIPPOCAMPUS AND VISUAL CORTEX DURING PERCEPTION AND
RETRIEVAL Sue-Hyun Lee1, Dwight Kravitz2, Chris Baker1; 1National Institute
of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 2The George Washington University — Memory retrieval allows humans to re-experience previously

experienced events or stimuli. Such retrieval is thought to evoke similar
representations in sensory cortical areas to those elicited during the actual
experience. Recent neuroimaging studies investigating neural activation
in sensory cortex support this idea, showing that cortical responses can
be used to decode the identity of retrieved items based on the activation
observed during perception. However, it remains unclear whether hippocampus, which has been thought to bind together sensory features to
create a unitary representation of the actual experience, also shows similar
neural activation during retrieval and perception. To compare these representations in hippocampus and visual cortex, we performed a 7T fMRI
experiment with a long-term memory task, comprising separate perception, learning and retrieval sessions. Using multi-voxel pattern analysis,
we found that object-selective cortex represents item specific information
during both perception and retrieval, whereas hippocampus represents the
specific information during retrieval only and not during perception. Moreover, in object-selective cortex but not hippocampus, there was close correspondence between the representations during perception and retrieval.
To clarify whether hippocampal representations during retrieval are longterm memory specific, we also conducted a similar fMRI experiment with a
short-term memory task. During retrieval of short-term memory, object-selective cortex but not hippocampus showed item specific representations
during retrieval. These results suggest that while reactivation of representations in visual cortex can occur immediately, hippocampal representations depend critically on a time-consuming consolidation processes.

A95
FEATURE-BASED OBJECT MEMORY RETRIEVAL IN RETIRED
PROFESSIONAL ATHLETES AS MEASURED BY EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Julie Fratantoni1, Bambi DeLaRosa1, Scott K.M. Shakal1, John
Hart Jr.1,2; 1Center for BrainHealth, The University of Texas at Dallas, 2Depart-

Poster Session A
ment of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center — Semantic feature integration is a cognitive phenomenon

requiring coordination between dispersed cortical regions; subsequently,
in injured and diseased states these circuits are disrupted. To investigate the neural mechanisms underlying dysfunctional semantic memory
retrieval we recorded scalp electroencephalography (EEG) during an object
retrieval task in 5 retired professional athletes with traumatic brain injury
(TBI), 4 retired professional athletes with mild cognitive impairment (MCI),
and 5 healthy controls (HC). The task involves object retrieval when two
visual words representing object features are presented. In some instances
the word pairs facilitate retrieval (i.e. “desert” and “humps” normally
elicits “camel”) and in other trials word pairs do not (i.e. “desert” and
“barks”). Previous studies have found that during this task there is a late
EEG amplitude difference between retrieval and non-retrieval word pairs
(Hsueh-Sheng et al., 2014). In the current study we found that athletes with
MCI had longer reaction times (M=1974.20 ms, SD=162.71ms) compared to
healthy controls (M=1507.46 ms, SD= 387.52 ms) for the non-retrieval word
pairs (t(7)=3.901, p=.006). Consistent with previous findings we also found
amplitude differences between retrieval and non-retrieval word pairs in
healthy controls (t(4)=2.972, p=.041). There was no significant amplitude
difference between the two conditions for both the athletes with TBI and
athletes with MCI. Findings suggest altered performance and disrupted
electrical signatures of semantic memory retrieval in individuals with TBI
and MCI.

A96
EXTENDING KNOWLEDGE THROUGH MEMORY INTEGRATION:
THE EFFECT OF LAG DURING ENCODING Nicole L. Varga1, Patricia J.
Bauer1; 1Emory University — Understanding how knowledge is acquired is

essential to understanding cognition. New content can enter the knowledge
base through direct experience, and also through self-generative processes
resulting from integration of information acquired across separate learning
episodes. Indeed, in everyday contexts, individuals are frequently faced
with the task of sorting through the vast amount of information encountered, integrating it with previously learned content, and extending upon
what is already known. We investigated the effect of lag between separate
but related learning episodes on this integration process. Twenty-seven
adults read 40 pairs of novel facts (Apple seeds are called pips; Cyanide is
found in pips) which could be combined to create novel integration facts
(Apple seeds contain cyanide). Half of the to-be-integrated sentences were
presented in each of two conditions: short lag and long lag (with M = 5
and 60 intervening sentences, respectively). Following the encoding task,
event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured while participants read
each of 80 sentences: 20 short-lag integrations, 20 long-lag integrations,
20 well-known facts, and 20 novel facts. A main effect of condition was
observed at central-parietal electrodes during the N400 time window,
F(3,78) = 13.62, p = .001. Bonferroni-corrected comparisons indicated that
integrated knowledge assumed an intermediate status between novel and
well-known information, irrespective of lag. Thus contrary to findings of
a benefit of long lags on subsequent memory for separate episodes, newly-integrated knowledge was processed similarly regardless of the distance
between items. This suggests differential processes for integrating versus
segregating separate episodes of experience.

A97
VMPFC DAMAGE REDUCES INFLUENCE OF SCHEMATIC MEMORY
IN A RECOGNITION MEMORY TASK Kelsey Spalding1, Samuel H. Jones1,
Melissa C. Duff1, Daniel Tranel1, David E. Warren1; 1University of Iowa — Schemas

are memory representations of typical experiences or settings, and schematic memory enhances reconstructive memory for typical events. However, this benefit of schematic memory may come at the cost of episode-specific information. Recent research suggests that ventromedial prefrontal
cortex (vmPFC) may be important for schematic memory. We used a neuropsychological approach to test whether individuals with vmPFC lesions
(N=5) would show a reduced influence of schematic memory, compared
to healthy normal comparisons (NC; N=10), in a recognition memory task
that provided schematically congruent or incongruent contexts for studied
items. At study, participants visualized specific objects in normatively congruent or incongruent contexts (e.g., “cactus”: “desert” or “ice rink”). At
test, participants indicated whether objects (without context) were studied,

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

53

Poster Session A
similar but not studied, or completely new. Congruent study contexts were
expected to increase false recognition (similar items called studied) relative
to incongruent contexts in the NC group due to increased schema influence
and corresponding reductions in memory specificity. Planned comparisons
supported this prediction. The NC group demonstrated increased false recognition in congruent contexts (t(9) = 3.921, p = .004). Critically, there was
no difference in performance between congruent and incongruent contexts
for the vmPFC group (t(4) = .024, p = .982), suggesting that vmPFC damage
reduced the influence of schematic memory. These preliminary results are
consistent with the proposition that vmPFC plays an important role in integrating previous experience into ongoing memory processes, and support
the idea that vmPFC may be part of a larger network of brain regions supporting memory processes.

A98
THE REPRESENTATION OF OBJECT-DIRECTED ACTION AND
FUNCTION KNOWLEDGE IN THE HUMAN BRAIN Quanjing Chen1, Frank
Garcea1, Bradford Mahon1; 1University of Rochester — The appropriate use of
everyday objects requires the integration of action and function knowledge.
Previous research suggests that action knowledge is represented in frontoparietal areas while function knowledge is represented in temporal lobe
regions. Here we used multivoxel pattern analysis to investigate the representation of object-directed action and function knowledge while participants executed pantomimes of familiar tool actions. A novel approach for
decoding object knowledge was used in which classifiers were trained on
one pair of objects and then tested on a distinct pair; this permitted a measurement of classification accuracy over and above object-specific information. ROI analyses showed that object-directed actions could be decoded
in tool-preferring regions of both parietal and temporal cortex, while no
independently defined tool-preferring ROI showed successful decoding
of object function. However, a whole brain searchlight analysis revealed
that while frontoparietal motor and peri-motor regions are engaged in the
representation of object-directed actions, medial temporal lobe areas in the
left hemisphere are involved in the representation of function knowledge.
These results indicate that both action and function knowledge are represented in a topographically coherent manner that is amenable to study
with multivariate approaches, and that the left medial temporal cortex represents knowledge of object function.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
A99
COMPLETION OF A MUSICAL TRAINING PROGRAM ENHANCES
PROCESSING OF ACOUSTIC FEATURES FOR SPEECH McNeel Jantzen1, Rebecca Scheurich1, Cliff Hare1, Nathan Braks1, Chelan Bressers1, K.J.
Jantzen1; 1Western Washington University — Our previous research has found

that musicians have enhanced selective attention and increased sensitivity to acoustic features of speech that is facilitated by musical training and
supported, in part, by right hemisphere homologues of established speech
processing regions of the brain (Jantzen, Howe, & Jantzen, 2014; Jantzen
and Scheurich, 2014). In the current study, we sought to provide evidence
that musical training would enhance the processing of acoustic information for speech sounds. We hypothesized that non-musicians would have
improved discrimination and enhanced sensitivity of acoustic features for
speech stimuli differing in voice onset time after completion of a musical
training program. Fifteen subjects first performed a perceptual mapping
procedure using a synthetic continuum that ranged from the American
English voiced alveolar [d] to the voiceless alveolar [t]. Subjects identified
the stimuli (2AFC) and judged how good the stimuli were as exemplars of
each of the two categories. Next, subjects received 11 sessions (one/day)
of an ear-training program. Finally, the perceptual mapping was repeated
immediately following training. Musical training effects and organization
of acoustic features were reflected in the EEG as observed by location and
amplitude of the ERP’s. Results show early neural response to the acoustic
features was both faster and greater following musical training. In addition,
behavioral results indicate that the pattern of performance on the perceptual mapping procedure differed as a function of initial perceptual capabilities.

54

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

A100
THE ROLE OF MOTOR FORCE PARAMETERS IN ACTION-RELATED
AUDITORY ERP ATTENUATION Janos Horvath1; 1Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy of Sciences — The processing of action-induced stimulation is often attenuated in comparison to that caused by
external sources. Specifically, self-induced sounds result in reduced
event-related potentials (ERPs), when these are compared to ERPs elicited
by externally induced sounds. In paradigms measuring action-related auditory attenuation, the auditory ERP contribution to the action-sound coincidence- related ERP is often estimated by subtracting a “motor-related”
ERP, that is, an ERP recorded when the action does not result in a sound.
The present study assessed the validity of this procedure by measuring the
force applied to the response device in a sound-initiation, and a “motor”
condition. Healthy, young adult participants (N=19) squeezed a response
device for 2 s intervals. In the Auditory-Motor condition, squeezing the
device resulted in a tone as long as the participant maintained pressure, but
no tone was generated in the Motor condition. The N1 and P2 estimated
by subtracting the motor-related ERP was attenuated in comparison to the
ERPs elicited by a replay of the self-induced sounds. Importantly, however, the squeeze force-profiles were different between conditions: participants applied more pressure in the Motor condition. Although separating
trials by the applied force showed ERP differences, these could not explain
the ERP attenuations found in the N1 and P2 time-range. This suggests
that although the estimation of the auditory ERP in the action-tone ERP
is flawed, N1 and P2 attenuation is not brought about by a motor-related
confound.

A101
PREDICTIVE ADAPTATION TO CHANGE IN BASAL GANGLIA
PATIENTS: ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY, STRUCTURAL IMAGING,
LESION-SYMPTOM MAPPING Michael Schwartze1, Anika Stockert2,3,
Sonja A. Kotz1,2; 1University of Manchester, School of Psychological Sciences,
2
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 3University
of Leipzig, Language and Aphasia Laboratory — Efficient use of regular

inter-event-relations, e.g., probabilistic associations or temporal regularity,
allows predicting future events. In turn, the ability to predict future events
may spare cognitive resources and optimize adaptation to an ever-changing environment. In concert with cortical areas, the basal ganglia (BG)
engage in the processing of temporal inter-event-relations (intervals). However, less is known about functional implications of this mechanism and
its interaction with cognitive behavior. Here, we investigated the impact
of BG lesions on auditory event-related potentials of the electroencephalogram (ERPs/EEG) obtained in temporally regular and irregular contexts.
Patients (N=30) and matched controls counted infrequent deviants (N=90,
660 Hz) presented among frequent standard (N=360, 600 Hz) equidurational (300 ms) tones in regular (inter-stimulus-interval, ISI: 600 ms) and
irregular (ISI: 200-1000 ms) “oddball” sequences. Cognitive behavior associated with deviance processing (change) was assessed by means of N1,
N2, P3a, and P3b ERP (sub-) components. Structural MRI scans were used
to generate binary lesion maps to perform complementary lesion-symptom mappings. In controls, temporal regularity and deviance processing
modulated early components independently and started to interact in
later components. In patients, early responses were selectively indifferent
to temporal regularity, while later responses to deviants were reduced in
amplitude in the regular context, suggesting impaired temporal processing
and subsequent use of temporal predictability. Mappings of amplitude and
variability measures derived from the respective ERPs substantiate these
findings. Taken together, the results provide evidence for both, modulation
of cognitive behavior by temporal predictability and a critical contribution
of the BG to this mechanism.

A102
THE EFFECTS OF SELF-SELECTED EMOTIONAL MUSIC ON EEG
AND PAIN MODULATION Trevor C. J. Jackson1, Christine R. Jimenez1, Mark
W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University — Music has been shown to have

an analgesic effect for pain when it is self-selected (Mitchell & MacDonald,
2006) or positively valenced (Roy, Peretz, & Rainville, 2008). The current
study investigated whether an analgesic effect of positive music is stronger
than negative music when both musical excerpts are self-selected. EEG was

2015 Annual Meeting
collected at bands of interest that included alpha (8-13 Hz), frontal-midline theta (4-8 Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz), and was recorded from Fz, F3, F4,
Cz, C3, C4, Pz, P3, and P4. Participants chose one song that was rated as
most positive, and one song that was rated as most negative. Participants
then listened to white noise (as a control) and each musical excerpt (in a
counterbalanced order) for 45 seconds before placing their hand into a
pain-inducing cold-pressor task (CPT) while the music played. Length of
time in the CPT was recorded, along with subjective pain intensity ratings
(11-point continuous Likert scale) and continuous EEG. Preliminary results
indicated longer times in the CPT for negative music compared to positive
music and white noise. Pain intensity ratings were nearly identical for both
positive and negative music, but were lower than white noise. EEG measures showed that, for positive music and white noise, frontal-midline theta
power was maximal during the time immediately preceding hand placement in the CPT, then power decreased during the painful stimulus. For
negative music, frontal-midline theta power was minimal during the time
immediately preceding hand placement in the CPT, then power increased
during the pain stimulus.

A103
ABNORMAL AUDITORY-MOTOR INTEGRATION OF VOICE CONTROL IN TEMPORAL LOBE EPILEPSY Hanjun Liu1, Weifeng Li1, Shaozhen
Chen1, Peng Liu1; 1Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University — A growing body of literature has shown

the neural substrates involved in auditory-motor integration through the
intra-cranial recordings of brain activity from patients undergoing temporal
lobe epilepsy (TLE). Whether those findings can be generalised to normal
populations, however, remains unclear. In the present study, we sought to
examine whether patients with TLE differed from healthy controls in the
auditory-motor integration in voice control. Following the altered auditory
feedback paradigm, all participants were required to produce sustained
vowels while hearing their voice feedback pitch-shifted in real-time. Vocal
and neurophysiological responses to pitch perturbations in voice auditory
feedback were measured and compared between two groups. Behavioral
results showed significantly larger vocal responses in the TLE group as
compared to the control group, and a positive correlation between response
magnitude and the mean baseline pitch was found only in the TLE group.
Neurophysiological results revealed a significant decrease of P2 response
in the TLE group relative to the control group. Furthermore, there was a
negative correlation between disease duration and P2 amplitude. Taken
together, this study provides the first evidence demonstrating the abnormal
auditory-motor integration in voice control in TLE at the levels of behavior
and cortex. This may be related to the dysfunction of auditory-vocal system
caused by epileptic seizure, suggesting that cautions must be exercised
in interpreting the results of auditory-motor integration obtained from
patients with TLE.

A104
PARAMETRIC EFFECTS OF GLOBAL AND LOCAL PRECEDENCE IN
AUDITORY PERCEPTION Alex Brandmeyer1, Jonas Obleser1; 1Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences — Global and local processes
in the perception of complex stimuli have been dissociated based on biases
in perceptual behavior and the underlying neurophysiology. In audition,
‘global’ and ‘local’ have been primarily considered with respect to different
temporal scales. Instead, the present magnetoencephalography study used
spectrotemporally complex stimuli, with parametric manipulations of both
global and local features. We asked how relevant and irrelevant stimulus
dimensions would interactively shape perception. Acoustic textures consisting of densely layered tone sweeps varying in the coherence of their
slopes (upwards or downwards, local feature), and with different spectral
centers (global feature) were presented in pitch and direction judgement
tasks using a within-subject (N=20) design. The irrelevant stimulus dimension was found to bias perceptual judgments both for congruent and incongruent stimuli: A strong global precedence effect occurred in the (local)
direction task. Local precedence effects were also observed in the (global)
pitch task when global cues were weak. The impact of local/global stimulus congruence on behavioral performance corresponded to modulations
of the M100 component of the evoked field at sensors over left fronto–temporal regions. Additionally, it was found that parametric changes in global
features during incongruent trials differentially modulated evoked activity

Poster Session A
in the M300 time window, depending on task setting: strong global cues
led to increased activity in the pitch task, and to reduced activity in the
direction task. Together, these results suggest that the precedence effects
associated with local and global levels of perceptual processing also shape
the perception of complex spectrotemporal sound features.

A105
A NEW ACOUSTIC SPACE TO INVESTIGATE HEMISPHERICAL
ASYMMETRIES IN SPEECH Adeen Flinker1, David Poeppel1; 1New York
University — The left and right hemispheres have been argued to have dif-

ferent sensitivities to temporal and spectral auditory information, but the
underlying cortical mechanisms remain unknown. Two related models
posit that asymmetries arise from a relative difference in temporal integration windows (i.e. AST, Poeppel 2003) or a difference in spectral versus
temporal resolution (i.e. Zatorre et al. 2002). Here we examine a unifying
scheme based on the modulation power spectrum (MPS) of speech, providing a novel framework to parametrically manipulate speech stimuli and
test psychophysical and neurophysiological responses. In contrast with a
spectrogram, which represents the signal’s amplitude across time and frequency, the MPS is a second order representation that assesses how the
time-frequency power is modulated across the spectral and temporal axes.
We propose that the two hemispheres integrate different ranges of spectral
and temporal modulations. In order to address this hypothesis, we implemented a new filtering technique and varied the degree of spectral and temporal modulations in the signal to produce new sentences materials. We
characterized the modulation space as a function of intelligibility as well
as pitch (here: gender) identification. Neurophysiological responses (MEG
power 0.1-8 Hz) across sensors correlated significantly with the temporal
and spectral modulation space. The spatial distribution of sensors was more
left lateralized for the temporal modulation axis and more right lateralized
for the spectral modulation axis. Behaviorally, the fine-graded parametric
steps reveal a sharp intelligibility cutoff, a right ear dichotic advantage as
well as an influence of spectral modulation on pitch perception.

A106
ALTERED SENSORIMOTOR INTEGRATION IN FEEDBACK CONTROL OF VOCAL PITCH IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Kamalini Ranasinghe1, Naomi Kort1, Alexander Beagle1, Jeevit Gill1, Danielle Mizuiri1, Susanne
Honma1, Keith Vossel1, John Houde1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1UCSF — A compel-

ling example of speech-motor integration is the pitch perturbation reflex in
which speakers respond rapidly to shifts of the pitch of their auditory feedback. In response to brief perturbations of pitch in the auditory feedback
subjects alter their vocalization to oppose the direction of the applied pitch
shift. Previous neurophysiological studies have linked these specific adjustments in vocal output to integration between sensory feedback error-detection and motor error-correction circuits of speech motor control system.
Such network integrations become vulnerable targets in neurodegenerative
diseases like Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which are characterized by distributed patterns of atrophy and functional dysconnectivity. In this study we
tested the hypothesis that AD patients will demonstrate altered pitch-perturbation reflex resulting from lack of modulation of distinct network components. We examined the neural and behavioral responses of pitch-perturbation reflex in AD patients (n=12) compared to an age-matched control
group (n=11). Subjects phonated the vowel /a/ while a real-time signal processor briefly perturbed (±100 Cent for 400ms) pitch of their auditory feedback. We used magnetoencephalography and examined the high-gamma
(50–150Hz) evoked response during the pitch altered feedback response.
We documented the degree of compensation demonstrated behaviorally by
each subject by changing their pitch in response to the pitch altered feedback. Behaviorally, AD patients demonstrated an elevated compensatory
response compared to age-matched controls. Neural analysis revealed that,
AD patients show a significantly enhanced high-gamma evoked activity
compared to age-matched control subjects. These results implicate lack of
sensory-motor network modulation during auditory feedback-based control of pitch in AD.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

55

Poster Session A

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
A107
AOA AND HOURS OF PRACTICE INDEPENDENTLY AFFECT BRAIN
ACTIVITY IN ATHLETES: AN FMRI STUDY. Arturo Hernandez1, Madeleine Gorges1, Maya Greene1, Brandin Munson1, Kelly Vaughn1, Victoria Wagner;
1
University of Houston — The present study investigated the neural correlates
associated with time spent playing (practice) and the age of initial learning (AoA) of a sport in a group of athletes. Although age of acquisition
is known to play a key role in a number of domains, only recently have
studies begun to explore its importance in sport. The present study tested a
group of athletes on a kinesthetic and auditory imagery task for both sport
and environmental sounds. Results from a multiple regression involving
both AoA and hours of practice revealed distinct areas of increased activity
for both. Across all stimuli, earlier AoA revealed increased brain activity in
areas involved in visual imagery as well as motor planning. Greater practice was associated with brain activity in the BA 17/18. Less practice was
associated with brain activity in bilateral cingulate, right inferior parietal
and inferior frontal areas. When sport and environmental sounds were
considered separately there was an effect of both practice and AoA. For
sport sounds, less practice was associated with increased activity in the
hippocampus (bilateral), thalamus, BA 17/18 and the precentral gyrus.
Later AoA was associated with increased activity in the inferior occipital
gyrus. Very small effects were observed for environmental sounds. These
results suggest that AoA of sport influences imagery in general. However,
the number of hours of practice may be more crucial in moderating brain
activity related to sports. Thus AoA may have a general influence on imagery whereas hours of practice may be more specific to sports.

A108
THE MULTISENSORY (AV) REPRESENTATION OF NUMBER Edward
M. Hubbard1, Danielle T. Day1, Christina T. Tran1, Jennifer C. Hathaway1, Grace C.
George1, Cooper Siepmann1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — To assess the

degree to which number is represented independent of sensory modality,
we asked naïve adults to make judgments about small quantities (in the
range from 7-10) of auditory beeps or visual flashes sequentially presented
quickly enough to discourage counting. Adults 1) estimated the number
of flashes or beeps (n = 50), or identified which of two intervals contained
the larger number (2-AFC; n = 16) when presented with beeps or flashes,
within and between modalities. In the estimation paradigm, we find classic signatures of the approximate number system, including approximate
responding and increasing variability with larger numbers. Estimates of
visual and auditory number were highly correlated across individuals, but
sensitivity was not. In the comparison paradigm, adults successfully compared numbers across modalities, but within modality comparisons were
more accurate than between modality comparisons. These data support
the hypothesis of a shared neural system for multisensory number, but
also suggest that non-abstract sensory processes also play a role. We next
showed that presentation of congruent numbers of flashes and beeps (n =
16) led to multisensory enhancement for number, as demonstrated by faster
and more accurate responses for the multisensory comparison, suggesting
neural convergence of signals for number. Finally, we found that audition
dominated nearly entirely when presented with conflicting numerical information (n = 16). Participants were able to accurately estimate the number
of auditory beeps, and estimates were not affected by visual number. Estimates of visual number, however, were strongly affected by the number of
simultaneous beeps presented.

A109
PREDICTIVE VISUAL MOTION FACILITATES SPEECH PERCEPTION David Brang1,2, Satoru Suzuki1, Vernon L Towle2, Sasha Wu2, James X Tao2,
Marcia Grabowecky1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Chicago — Audi-

tory speech is typically accompanied by multisensory cues that actively
enhance the speed and accuracy of auditory perception and compensate
for degraded auditory processing in the presence of environmental noise or
auditory deficits. Research investigating multisensory influences on speech
perception has primarily focused on lip articulations during lipreading
(speechreading) providing contextual information for a heard phoneme.
However, benefits from multisensory integration are not limited to speech

56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
stimuli or contextual processes, and visual facilitation of speech perception
may utilize other multisensory mechanisms. Here we demonstrate a novel
form of multisensory facilitation present in natural speech, in which preparatory lip movements enhance phoneme recognition by predicting the
timing of speech-sound onset. Healthy participants (n=20) were presented
with one of four spoken phonemes (/ba/,/ga/,/ka/,/pa/) embedded in
noise and were instructed to report the heard phoneme. Participants experienced a significant benefit of seeing predictive visual motion relative
to seeing non-predictive motion or hearing auditory speech alone, highlighting the benefit for speech perception of sound-onset prediction from
anticipatory visual motion. In order to examine the role of predictive visual
information on auditory neural processes, we acquired intracranial electrocorticographic (ECoG) recordings from three patients undergoing evaluation for intractable epilepsy who performed the task. Indices of local spiking
activity were computed from electrodes neighboring auditory cortex. Each
of the three patients showed significantly reduced activation of auditory
cortex on the predictive-motion trials relative to the non-predictive-motion
or auditory-alone trials, suggesting that predictive visual motion reduces
auditory processing requirements through enhancing perceptual fluency.

A110
TOP-DOWN REGULATION OF PRIMARY SOMATOSENSORY
CORTEX WHEN JUDGING LATERALITY OF HAND IMAGES Bettina
Forster1, Simone Tüttenberg1, Alejandro Galvez-Pol1, Antonella Giallonardo1,
Valentina Comiti1, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1,2; 1City University London, London, UK,
2
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain — Neuroimaging studies
consistently report activation of somatosensory areas when viewing body
images. To investigate whether recruitment of somatosensory areas is automatic or regulated via top-down processes (task set) when viewing body
images we recorded electrocortical activity while participants performed
two tasks: a laterality judgement task of hand images, and, in another
part, a gender judgement task of the same hand images. Importantly, we
probed activity within the somatosensory system by presenting task irrelevant tactile stimuli to the fingers (evoking somatosensory event potentials
- SEPs). Further, to control for any visual evoked effects ERPs on visual only
trials (without tactile probe) were subtracted from touch trials. The resulting difference SEPs showed significantly enhanced amplitudes at the P45
component in the laterality compared to the gender judgment task while
later latencies show task differences over sensorimotor areas (frontal and
parietal cortex). As the P45 reflects activity within primary somatosensory
cortex (S1), and given we controlled for possible visual carry over effects
by visual condition subtraction, our results provide evidence for a topdown regulation of S1 when judging body images and, thus, a flexible, task
driven contribution of S1 to embodied cognition.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
A111
FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF DELTA AND THETA BAND OSCILLATIONS
FOR AUDITORY FEEDBACK PROCESSING DURING VOCAL PITCH
MOTOR CONTROL Roozbeh Behroozmand1, Nadine Ibrahim2, Oleg Korzyukov2, Donald Robin3, Charles Larson2; 1Speech Neuroscience Lab, Department
of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of South Carolina, 2Speech
Physiology Lab, Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, 3Research Imaging Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio — Speech motor control in a highly complex task
that requires neural communication between spatially-segregated but
functionally-related areas in the brain. The present study investigated the
neural correlates of speech motor control by studying the spectro-temporal
dynamics of EEG responses when three groups of non-musicians (NM),
relative pitch (RP) and absolute pitch (AP) musicians maintained steady
vowel sound vocalizations and received pitch perturbations in their voice
auditory feedback. We identified two neural response components that
highlighted different aspects of auditory feedback processing during vocal
pitch motor control. The first component appeared as a phase-synchronized (evoked) fronto-central theta band (5-8 Hz) activity that temporally
overlapped with compensatory vocal responses and was significantly
stronger in RP and AP compared with NM. The second component was a

2015 Annual Meeting
non-phase-synchronized (induced) frontal delta band (1-4 Hz) activity that
had longer onset latency, extended beyond the duration of vocalizations
and was stronger in the NM compared with RP and AP. These findings
suggest that the evoked theta reflects top-down mechanisms of auditory
feedback processing for vocal pitch motor control, and is also a neurophysiological marker of enhanced cognitive ability for pitch processing in RP
and AP musicians. However, delta band activity seem to reflect neural processes by which the current state of the sensory-motor networks is updated
during an adaptive process that drives subsequent speech motor behavior
in response to perturbed auditory feedback. These findings provide new
insights to distinctly different neural mechanisms that process auditory
feedback for online monitoring and control of vocal pitch during speaking.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
A112
LOCATION-SPECIFIC ADAPTATION OF AUDITORY EEG
RESPONSES IS AFFECTED BY CROSSMODAL INTEGRATION Talia
Shrem1, Leon Y. Deouell1; 1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem — Space is a

dimension shared by all modalities, but at what stage spatial encoding is
affected by crossmodal integration is not clear. In light of direct connections between primarily unimodal sensory cortices, it is conceivable that
relatively early processing is sensitive to crossmodal effects. Previous studies have found attenuation of the N1-P2 auditory evoked response following repetition of sounds from the same location. We asked whether this
effect will be modulated by audio-visual interaction. We presented pairs
of sounds in free field. The test sound was presented at a fixed lateral location. The preceding adapter sound was presented from the same location
or from a more medial location, and was accompanied by a simultaneous
flash displayed orthogonally from one of the two locations. Behaviorally,
the sound-flash congruency affected the perceived adapter sound location
(the ventriloquism effect). Overall we found attenuation of the N1- P2 complex relative to the response to the first sound. The attenuation of the N1
response was not affected by adapter sound location, but was affected by
the location of the preceding flash, possibly due to spatial cueing. In contrast, attenuation of the P2 response was affected by the adapter sound location, being stronger when the adapter sound appeared at the same rather
than different location. Importantly, this effect interacted with sound-flash
congruency, such that spatially incongruent flashes reduced the location
specificity effect. We conclude that spatial encoding in auditory cortex is
not entirely unimodal and that it may be susceptible to crossmodal perceptual illusions of space.

A113
PREPARATORY PROCESSES OF MOTOR IMAGERY AND EXECUTION IN ADULTS WITH AND WITHOUT HAZARDOUS DRINKING
PROBLEM: AN ERP STUDY John Shing-Yu Chan1, Yi Jin1, Jin Hong Yan2;
1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing, 100875, China, 2Institute of Affective and Social Neuroscience, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China — Alcohol intake has

been shown to impair both cognitive and motor functions. In previous
studies, alcohol drinking is related to a reduction in motor preparation and
the impairment is dosage dependent. In this study, we examined if such a
reduced capability can be extended to motor imagery in adults with and
without hazardous drinking problem. Sixteen hazardous drinkers (HD,
25.73±3.06 years) and 16 control subjects (CON, 23.94±3.09 years) were
recruited. HD scored 8 or more on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification
Test (AUDIT). Event-related potentials were recorded with an S1-S2 paradigm which elicits contingent negative variation (CNV). Participants had
to physically execute a sequential finger movement (PE), or imagine producing it visually (VI) or kinesthetically (KI) when they heard the imperative signal 3 seconds after the corresponding visual warning signal. Results
showed that HD and CON had comparable early (800-1300ms post-S1) and
late CNV (2500-3000ms post-S1) amplitude. PE and VI elicit similar early
and late CNV amplitudes, which are significantly larger than those of KI.
The findings suggest normal arousal level and preparatory processes preceding motor execution and imagery in HD. In addition, PE and VI may
share similar motor preparatory processes, requiring greater arousal and
preparatory efforts than KI.

Poster Session A

A114
VISUAL AND HAPTIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE DEVELOPMENT
OF HAND PREFERENCE FOR GRASPING Kayla Stone1, Claudia Gonzalez1; 1University of Lethbridge — Studies on the development of handedness

have demonstrated a right-hand preference for grasping by age five. But
what factors contribute to the development of this right-hand preference?
Since grasping an object requires processing visual and haptic information,
sensory feedback must play a pivotal role in the establishment of hand
preference. Recent studies on right-handed adults have shown a righthand preference for visually-guided grasping, but an increased preference
for the left hand during haptically-guided grasping. These findings have
been attributed to a right-hand/left-hemisphere specialization for visually-guided grasping and a left-hand/right-hemisphere specialization for
haptically-guided object recognition. However, little is known about the
development of such specializations. Are children, who inarguably have
less experience grasping and manipulating objects, affected by sensory
changes prior to grasping? We asked children (5-8 years old) to replicate 3D
models from a tabletop of building blocks under different sensory (visual
or haptic) conditions and recorded the hand selected to grasp each block.
Results showed clear differences in hand preference for grasping when
hapsis or vision was occluded: a right-hand preference for visually-guided
grasping, and a significant increase in left-hand use for haptically-guided
grasping. The results support a hemispheric division of labour for visually- and haptically-guided actions, which is fully developed by age five.
Moreover, the results suggest that hand preference for grasping develops
from an interplay of the visual and haptic systems.

A115
RECENT FINDINGS REGARD EEG MEASURES OF MENTAL LOAD
IN 3D AND 2D INTERFACES Alex Dan1, Miriam Reiner1; 1Technion, Israel
Institute of Technology, 2Technion, Israel Institute of Technology — A - Synchronous interaction, especially in learning, became embedded in everyday
educational systems and basic instruction needs of the public. In this study,
we look at the role of interface in remote learning and what are the properties of an optimal ome for enhanced learning. 2D representations are perceptually less loaded compared to 3D. 3D representations are more precise are more easily recognizable. We hypothesize that in 3D, patterns are
easily recognized compared to 2D corresponding patterns, and therefore
reduce the extraneous mental load of the learner. This research compares
the mental load in a task learned either with a 3D Human Realistic Avatar
and a 2D video. In the study, we used an origami task with motor and cognitive components. The dependent variables were the mental load as measured by EEG; students’ perceived mental load based on questionnaires
and a posttest exam. We measured the spectrum EEG using two channels.
Our research question is that multisensory integration of visual cues that
exhibit biological motion of the 3D Human Realistic Avatar, result in automatic and, therefore, effortless embodiment of a mental motor plan. From a
learning perspective, this reduces the mental load, by leaving more working memory capacity available for processes such as elaboration or reflection on intentions of actions. The results of the will are showed. Results
show that there are some other EEG measures that may be associated with
the mental load, and the correlation between the learning method and the
different dependent variables.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
A116
HIGHER RESPONSE GAIN IN SUSTAINED STATE VISUAL EVOKED
RESPONSE IN INDIVIDUALS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Yukari Takarae1, Savanna Sablich1, John Sweeney1; 1Center for Autism
and Developmental Disabilities, University of Texas Southwestern — Sensory

abnormalities are frequently reported in Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
and have been newly added to the ASD diagnostic criteria for the DSM-V.
Hypersensitivity to sensory stimuli is a common form of such sensory
abnormalities in ASD and warrants further examination. We used high
density EEG to investigate biological correlates of sensory hypersensitivity
in ASD individuals. Fifteen high functioning adolescents and adults with
ASD and 10 age-matched typically developing individuals participated in

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

57

Poster Session A
the current study. Sinewave gratings (2 cycles/deg) were presented with
an on/off frequency of 4Hz at 10 different contrast levels (5, 10, 20, 30, .
. . 90%). Evoked stimulus power increased with an increase in stimulus
contrast at a much higher rate in the ASD group than the TD group. The
observed group difference was greatest at the highest contrast, consistent
with a change in response gain, rather than stimulus gain. Response gain
in neural response has been known to increase with administrations of glutamate agonist or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) antagonists and thus
is sensitive to alterations in cortical excitability. The observed data pattern
also resembles those previously reported in epilepsy patients, a population known for cortical hyperexcitability. Thus, the result suggests cortical
hyperexcitability in the ASD group and corroborates sensory processing
differences seen clinically in individuals with ASD.

A117
NEURAL GENERATORS OF CHILDREN’S EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS TO STANDARD, TARGET, AND NOVEL VISUAL EVENTS
Anthony Herdman1, Jelena Obradović2, W. Thomas Boyce3; 1University of British
Columbia, 2Stanford University, 3Uinversity of California San Fancisco — The

main goal of this study was to determine the underlying neural generators
of children’s event-related potentials (ERPs) evoked during a visual novelty oddball task. ERPs were recorded from 62 children (8 to 10 years old)
while they performed a visual selective-attention task of detecting tilted
triangles (target, 10% probability) among upright triangles (standard, 75%
probability) and novel photos (novel, 15% probability). Discrete-dipole
modeling (BESA) and distributed-source imaging (LCMV beamformer)
methods were used to localize the neural generators of the visual evoked
potentials: P1, N1, P2, N2c, and P3b. As would be expected based on previous research, generators for children’s visual ERPs evoked by standard and
target stimuli were mostly localized to bilateral occipital (P1 and N1), inferior temporal (P1), and occipital-parietal cortices (P2). Interestingly though,
the children’s N1 response had an additional source in the frontal mid-line
for both discrete-dipole and distributed-source models. Target P3b generators were mainly localized to mid-line parietal cortices with additional
frontal activity being evident in the beamformer images. Most surprisingly,
children’s generators of the N2c evoked by novel visual stimuli were primarily localized to bilateral occipital and inferior temporal cortices with
no evidence of frontal sources from either discrete-dipole or distributed-source results. This later finding is inconsistent with previous research
in adults that suggested the N2c reflects recruitment of frontal-posterior
networks for orienting to novel events.

A118
UPRIGHT FACE-PREFERENTIAL HIGH-GAMMA RESPONSES IN
LOWER-ORDER VISUAL AREAS: EVIDENCE FROM INTRACRANIAL RECORDINGS IN CHILDREN Eishi Asano1,2, Naoyuki Matsuzaki1,2,
Rebecca Schwarzlose2, Masaaki Nishida1,2, Noa Ofen2; 1Children’s Hospital of
Michigan, 2Wayne State University — Behavioral studies demonstrate that a

face presented in the upright orientation attracts attention more rapidly
than an inverted face. Saccades toward an upright face take place in 100140 ms following presentation. The present study using electrocorticography determined whether upright face-preferential neural activation, as
reflected by augmentation of high-gamma activity at 80-150 Hz, involved
the lower-order visual cortex within the first 100 ms post-stimulus presentation. Sampled lower-order visual areas were verified by the induction of
phosphenes upon electrical stimulation. These areas resided in the lateral-occipital, lingual, and cuneus gyri along the calcarine sulcus, roughly
corresponding to V1 and V2. Measurement of high-gamma augmentation
during central (circular) and peripheral (annular) checkerboard reversal
pattern stimulation indicated that central-field stimuli were processed
by the more polar surface whereas peripheral-field stimuli by the more
anterior medial surface. Upright face stimuli, compared to inverted ones,
elicited up to 23% larger augmentation of high-gamma activity in the lower-order visual regions at 40-90 ms. Upright face-preferential high-gamma
augmentation was more highly correlated with high-gamma augmentation
for central than peripheral stimuli. Our observations are consistent with the
hypothesis that lower-order visual regions, especially those for the central
field, are involved in visual cues for rapid detection of upright face stimuli.

58

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

A119
SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS OF ACTION IN THE POSTERIOR
MIDDLE TEMPORAL GYRUS Lorna Quandt1, Yune-Sang Lee1, Diana RosaLeyra2, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania, 2Brandeis University —
Action information can be conveyed in a variety of formats, which may
vary in how abstract or concrete they are. This study investigated how different symbolic representations of action (e.g., action pictograms and action
verbs) are processed in the brain, particularly in the posterolateral middle
temporal gyrus, which is thought to represent actions across varying levels
of abstraction. While prior work has shown that the posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG) is involved in processing abstract action concepts, no
existing work has compared schematic action pictograms to action verbs.
We predicted that while both action pictograms and action words would
recruit pMTG, the pictograms would result in greater pMTG activation,
since they contain more perceptual detail and may be more evocative of
motion. Nineteen healthy participants viewed action pictograms (AP),
action words (AW), object pictograms (OP), and object words (OW) in
a sparse event-related design while fMRI data was collected. Univariate
fMRI analyses revealed that BOLD activity was greater for AP than AW
in occipital regions, bilateral fusiform, and bilateral pMTG, and greater
for AW than AP in bilateral caudate. Activation was greater for AP than
OP in bilateral pMTG and the posterior inferior temporal cortex. Overall,
activation was greater for Actions (AP+AW) than for Objects (OP+OW) in
bilateral pMTG and surrounding inferior temporal cortex. All comparisons
are significant at p<.001 with cluster correction. Our findings suggest that
the pMTG is selective for action concepts across symbolic presentation formats. A representational similarity analysis demonstrates commonalities in
action processing across different formats.

A120
HIGH ROAD OR LOW ROAD? DISSECTING THE CONTRIBUTION
OF CORTICAL AND SUBCORTICAL VISUAL PATHWAYS TO THREAT
ENCODING IN AN AVERSIVE CONDITIONING STUDY Yuqi You1, Wen
Li1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Prevailing accounts hold that a sub-

cortical pathway to the amygdala (“a low road”) mediates fast threat processing, but accruing evidence implicates additional mechanisms. By pairing Gabor patches with highly aversive pictures and sounds, we contrasted
aversive associative learning for Gabors primarily activating the cortical
pathway (isoluminant red/green in high spatial frequencies/HSFs) versus
those dominantly activating the subcortical pathway (gray-scale in low SF;
N=52). Before, immediately after and 2 weeks after the conditioning phase,
subjects performed a perceptual discrimination task to judge whether the
CS+ or CS- Gabor had the same or different orientation from a following
Gabor patch (0-12 degree offset) while high-density EEG was acquired.
Behavioral analysis revealed a significant Gabor-type-by-Time-by-Anxiety
interaction (F(1, 50)= 6.86, p = 0.01): high trait anxiety was associated with
improved discrimination (d’) for CS+ (vs. CS-) from before to immediately
after conditioning , but in gray-scale CS+ only (r = 0.28, p = 0.04). Comparing before and 2 weeks after conditioning, we observed a significant
Time-by-Anxiety interaction (F(1, 40)= 3.41, p = 0.07): a general speed up in
perceptual discrimination for both gray-scale and chromatic CS+ (vs. CS-)
in high versus low anxious subjects. Together, current findings indicate
both immediate and long-lasting perceptual learning as a result of aversive
associative learning while specifying the low road (subcortical visual pathway to amygdala) in mediating immediate perceptual gain. ERP analysis is
underway to confer additional insights into the visual pathways supporting threat encoding and their respective patterns of short-term and longterm plasticity via aversive associative learning.

A121
NATIVE READING DIRECTION INFLUENCES VISUAL EXPLORATIONS AND PREFERENCES OF LATERALLY LIT IMAGES Austen K.
Smith1, Lorin J. Elias1; 1University of Saskatchewan — Although perceptual
and spatial asymmetries are often biased towards the left in neurologically normal individuals, known as pseudoneglect, lighting (Sun & Perona,
1998), spatial location (Nicholls, Bradshaw, & Mattingley, 1999), and native
reading direction (Fagard & Dahmen, 2004) have been found to influence
attention and perception. Smith and Elias (2013) compared left-to-right
(LtoR) and right-to-left (RtoL) readers on an image comparison task and

2015 Annual Meeting
found LtoR readers’ scanning distributions to be significantly more leftward as well as a preference for leftward-lit images among LtoR readers. Whereas Smith and Elias (2013) presented 2 images simultaneously,
the current study examines scanning distributions of a single image and
compares preference ratings at time 1 and 2. Eighty images with a clear
left or right source of illumination were presented in block 1 and eighty
mirror images were presented in block 2. Image presentation was limited
to 2000 msec. and a preference score was recorded directly after viewing
each image. The overall distribution of fixations across all images (regardless of lighting direction) was not significantly biased in any way for either
reading direction group, however, when lighting direction of the image
was considered differences between reading direction groups were found.
Additionally, image preference ratings interacted with reading direction.
Differences in fixation patterns were found and the degree to which images
are visually explored like directional (left-to-right or right-to-left) text is
discussed.

A122
TYPICALITY SHARPENS OBJECT REPRESENTATIONS IN
OBJECT-SELECTIVE CORTEX Marius Cătălin Iordan1, Michelle R. Greene1,
Diane M. Beck2, Li Fei-Fei1; 1Stanford University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The purpose of categorization is to identify generalizable
classes of objects whose members can be treated equivalently. Within a category, however, some exemplars are more representative of that concept
than others. This typicality effect manifests as increased speed of recognition and lower error rates for verifying category membership for the more
typical items (Rosch, 1973; Rosch & Mervis, 1975). Despite these behavioral
effects, little is known about how typicality influences the neural representation of objects from the same category. To address this question, we
performed an fMRI experiment where participants were shown color photographs from 64 subordinate-level object categories grouped into 8 basiclevel categories (4 animals and 4 vehicles). Typicality for each subordinate
within its basic category was assessed behaviorally. We analyzed neural
responses in early visual areas and object-selective areas: V1, V2, V3v,
hV4, LOC. For each brain area, we computed separate similarity matrices
(Kriegeskorte et al., 2008) for the most and least prototypical halves of the
category set. We show that in object-selective cortex LOC, but not in early
visual areas, typical categories distinguish significantly better between
basic-level categories than less typical ones, suggesting that typicality
enhances within-category similarity (cohesion) and between-category dissimilarity (distinctiveness). Furthermore, in LOC, typical categories capture the category central tendency as it’s encoded in the neural activity
patterns. This suggests that real-world objects show neural reference to a
prototype representation and that typicality may be correlated to neural
distance between categories in LOC, with highly typical members maximizing dissimilarity to instances of other categories.

A123
A ROLE FOR STRIATAL DOPAMINE IN VISUAL CONSCIOUSNESS:
EVIDENCE FROM EYE-BLINKS Filip Van Opstal1, Tom Verguts2, Esther De
Loof2; 1Center for Research in Cognition & Neurosciences, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Belgium, 2Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University,
Belgium — In two experiments the relation between striatal dopamine and

visual consciousness was investigated. The spontaneous eye-blink rate
(EBR) was used to measure striatal D2 receptor density. Visual consciousness was measured with breaking continuous flash suppression (b-CFS). In
a first experiment (n = 15), the EBR was measured by the vertical electro-oculogram, which recorded the voltage difference between two electrodes
placed above and below the right eye of the participants. Linear regression analysis revealed a significant relation between the EBR and b-CFS
(p = .0397), and thus confirmed the relation between striatal dopamine
and visual consciousness. Contrary to what would be expected, no relation between the moment of an eye-blink and the point at which the visual
information broke through suppression was observed. A second experiment (n = 21) replicated this result with a simplified method to measure the
EBR. EBR was now measured prior to the experiment by letting subjects
look at a monitor while their eye-blinks were recorded on video for three
minutes. The EBR was defined by counting the number of blinks. Results
of this experiment closely matched the results of the first experiment by
showing a close to significant relation between EBR and b-cfs (p = .0905).

Poster Session A
A regression analysis on both experiments together showed a significant
effect of EBR on b-cfs (p = .0172). These results convincingly show a relation
between the EBR and visual consciousness, in line with recent results that
argued for a similar relation with positron emission tomography.

THINKING: Decision making
A124
COGNITIVE ENGAGEMENT IN THE PREPARATION AND EXECUTION OF MORALLY-RELEVANT DECEPTION Nolan O’Hara1, William Gehring1; 1University of Michigan — Acts of deception require a number of unique
and cognitively demanding processes that facilitate personal understanding of what is lie and what is truth. Unfortunately, the vast majority of neuroimaging research that attempts to deconstruct these processes has explicitly instructed subjects to lie or has otherwise morally sanctioned the act of
lying. Such studies fail to observe the motivational and ethically-relevant
processes that make deception so important in the real world. We report
on an event-related potential (ERP) analogue of Joshua Greene and Joseph
Paxton’s fMRI study in which subjects are not told to lie, but rather choose
to lie of their own volition after realizing that the experimental structure
can be exploited for dishonest monetary gain. Subjects who were willing
to act deceptively in this morally accountable context showed distinctive
ERP responses preceding potential lies. Specifically, stimuli about which a
dishonest participant was able lie elicited more negative feedback-related
negativities and less positive P3 waveforms. The extent of these effects
further varied as a function of a deceptive subject’s preceding behavior,
suggesting an ongoing process of self-monitoring uniquely associated with
morally-relevant deception. The observed patterns of activity may point to
the importance and detectability of ethical and motivational processes that
precede real-world deception, rather than processes that underlie the actual
execution of deceptive acts. Such findings can enrich both our interpretation of past studies investigating instructed deceit and also our temporal
understanding of ethical decisions more generally.

A125
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF RETROSPECTIVE AND PROSPECTIVE
CONFIDENCE JUDGMENTS IN PROBABILISTIC CATEGORIZATION
Timothy Kelley1, Benjamin England2, Michael Serra1, Nadia Sari-Sarraf1, Tyler
Davis1; 1Texas Tech University, 2Missouri Western State University — Although

current literature on neuroimaging of metacognition is sparse, converging
research from a number of domains, including perception and metamemory, has implicated the right lateral prefrontal cortex (rlPFC) in confidence
judgments. One key distinction that has not been fully investigated in neuroimaging is the distinction between prospective and retrospective confidence judgments. In terms of cognitive processing, prospective judgments
involve predictions about future events whereas retrospective judgments
involve evaluations of past performance. To examine whether these cognitive differences translate to differences in neural processing, we scanned
participants as they learned a probabilistic categorization task and made
prospective and retrospective confidence judgments about their performance. Consistent with the previous literature, we found significant activation in rlPFC when comparing prospective confidence judgments to retrospective judgments, after removing the effect of the categorization cue from
each. Contrastingly, retrospective judgments were associated with activation in the ventral striatum. This result converges with previous categorization research implicating the ventral striatum in uncertainty processing
and suggests that activation in this region may reflect post-decisional evaluation. Together these results suggest that different types of metacognitive
judgments can have different neural substrates and future neural models
will need to take into account their unique processing characteristics.

A126
ACUTE STRESS EXPOSURE AND EXPRESSION OF INSTRUMENTALLY CONDITIONED FINANCIAL PREFERENCES: AN FMRI
STUDY William McCuddy1, Stephanie Potts1, Anthony J. Porcelli1; 1Marquette
University — Recent research suggests acute stress exposure is associated

with increased habit-based over goal-oriented decision making (e.g.,
Schwabe & Wolf, 2011). We examined whether acute stress promoted
expression of simple financial preferences “overtrained” to the point of

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

59

Poster Session A
habit in the face of a changing environment where said preferences were
later rendered non-optimal. Over three days participants (current N = 19)
learned to discriminate between visual stimuli probabilistically associated
with monetary gains or losses and made decisions between stimuli with
real financial outcomes. On the fourth day after exposure to either an acute
stressor or control procedure participants performed the same tasks during
fMRI scanning, including additional learning and decision tasks where
monetary values associated with the same stimuli were altered. Choice and
fMRI data, psychophysiological measures (e.g., blood pressure, skin conductance, and EKG), and salivary cortisol were collected. Participants in
both groups successfully made optimal decisions between stimuli on Days
1 to 3 (reaching asymptote on Day 2). Preliminary analysis of Day 4 data
revealed significantly increased sympathetic nervous system activation and
salivary cortisol levels in acutely stressed participants only. During fMRI
scanning after stimuli values were altered stressed participants made significantly more decisions consistent with original stimuli values, although
these decisions were now financially detrimental, than did non-stressed
participants. Thus, stressed participants made decisions more consistent
with their overtrained (i.e., habit-based) preferences. It is expected that at
the neural level during decision making a shift will be observed from prefrontal and dorsomedial striatal towards dorsolateral striatal processing.

A127
MODEL-BASED AND MODEL-FREE PAIN AVERSION LEARNING
Oliver Wang1,3, Ben Seymour2,4, Sangwan Lee5, John O’Doherty5, Wako Yoshida3;
1
Stanford University, 2University of Cambridge, 3Advanced Telecommunications
Research Institute International, 4Center for Information and Neural Networks,
5
California Institute of Technology — There has been accumulating neural evi-

dence for multiple action systems underlying human reward learning, in
particular a cognitive “model-based” system, and computationally simpler
“model-free” (akin to ‘habits’). However, whether a comparable distinction exists for avoidance has been relativity unexplored, and indeed the
very nature of avoidance learning has been much less clearcut. Here, we
implemented a behavioral task to look for evidence of two distinct systems during physical pain avoidance learning, mirroring a paradigm and
modelling approach recently developed for a financial reward task (Lee
et al.,2014). The experiment, performed by 16 healthy subjects, involved a
two-step instrumental paradigm with probabilistic pain outcomes of varying magnitude (0-4 electrical pain stimuli), and with the delivery of outcomes contingent on signals indicating the trial type (to provide a form of
outcome devaluation). Analysis by computational model fitting strongly
suggested that a model-free system could not adequately account for task
performance, and that a dual model-based and model-free system provided the best account of the data. Interestingly, in comparison to reward,
we found a significantly greater tendency for subjects to divert from model-free to model-based controllers in the face of uncertainty. Overall, the
data supports a dual-system model of pain avoidance, similar too, but
much more ‘conservative’ than reward acquisition.

A128
NEURAL CORRELATES TO RULE-BASED AND EXEMPLAR-BASED
MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF JUDGMENT Sara Stillesjö1,2, Johan Eriksson1,2, Peter Juslin3, Lars Nyberg1,2, Linnea Karlsson1,2; 1Umeå center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), Umeå University, Sweden, 2Umeå University, Sweden,
3
Uppsala University, Sweden — Cognitive modeling has repeatedly revealed
that both rule-based and similarity-based (exemplar-based) models can
predict human judgment data quite well. We tested key assumptions of
such models by investigating neural correlates to both instructed and spontaneously adopted strategies using fMRI. In a between-group design, participants made judgments of a continuous criterion in a multiple-cue judgment task. Some participants were taught to explicitly rely on rule-based
or exemplar-based strategies, whereas other participants spontaneously
adopted rule-based or exemplar-based strategies in response to outcome
feedback. After learning, all groups were scanned with fMRI while doing
judgments without feedback. Using cognitive modeling we verified which
participants had relied on rule-based or exemplar-based models and an
ANOVA tested for differences in evoked brain responses between the
strategies. Rule-based strategies evoked relatively more activity than exemplar-based strategies in premotor areas, dorsolateral prefrontal, middle

60

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
temporal, and inferior and superior parietal cortices. Exemplar-based strategies evoked relatively more activity than rule-based strategies in left precuneus/cuneus and left inferior parietal cortex. Our results suggest that
both instructed and spontaneous rule-based models of judgment taxes
regions important for executive functions and explicit verbal memory to a
larger degree than exemplar-based models. Moreover, both instructed and
spontaneous exemplar-based models taxes regions important for episodic
memory retrieval and selective attention to a larger degree than rule-based
models. By combining the approaches of cognitive modeling and fMRI our
results complement previous findings from the categorization literature,
focusing on instructed strategies, and confirm some of the key assumptions
of cognitive models of human judgment.

A129
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL PROCESSING OF PERSUASIVE MESSAGES: IMPLICATIONS FOR MESSAGE TAILORING
René Weber1, Benjamin O. Turner1, Richard Huskey1, J. Michael Mangus1; 1University of California Santa Barbara - Media Neuroscience Lab — Neuroimaging

studies show that multiple functional networks are recruited when processing persuasive messages and that activation in these networks is predictive of behavior change (Falk et al., 2012). These studies typically rely on
group level investigations of neural activity and its correlation with a small
number of behavioral variables. However, mounting evidence suggests
that activation patterns for identical behavioral outcomes are modulated
by individual differences in attitudes or traits including cognitive style,
sensation seeking (SS), and personal involvement (among many others),
in addition to demographic and anatomical differences (Miller et al., 2009).
Consequently, if neuroimaging is to be used to help tailor messages to individuals with the goal of improving message effectiveness, then the multiple
dimensions along which individuals may differ must also be considered.
This study seeks to isolate a selection of theoretically-relevant factors that
explain individual differences in neural processing above and beyond what
might be expected based on self-reported message effectiveness and anatomical differences. Anti-drug public service announcements (PSAs) were
shown to 28 participants while undergoing fMRI (Weber et al., 2014). We
also collected participants’ ratings of the PSAs, drug-use risk, and scores
on other scales including SS. We found extensive individual variability in
neural processing of these PSAs, a significant proportion of which could
be explained by examining how individuals differed along these other
measures. We suggest that using neuroimaging for improving individual
message tailoring (e.g. within social media sites) is only effective when considering the many ways in which individuals’ neural responses differ.

A130
GENETIC INFLUENCES ON EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR IN HUMANS
Hans Melo1, Daniel Müller1,2, William Cunningham1, Adam Anderson3; 1University
of Toronto, 2Center for Addiction and Mental Health, 3Cornell University — When

confronted with making a choice in an uncertain environment, humans
must decide whether to exploit a known option or explore a less familiar
but potentially more rewarding option. Previous work on this exploitation-exploration dilemma reveal that orbitofrontal cortex (OPFC) and interparietal sulcus are associated with explorative behavior, whereas activation of regions in the striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)
are related to exploitative behavior. The aim of this study was to examine
dopamine-related genetic influences on exploratory behavior. Bearing in
mind regions of the brain implicated in this phenomenon, we focused on
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with striatal dopamine
function (DAT1/SLC6A3, DRD2 C957T, DRD4) and frontal dopamine
function (COMT Val158Met). Functional Magnetic Brain Imaging (fMRI)
activity was collected from 74 healthy individuals (38 male; mean age 21)
using a 3T GE MRI scanner while participants performed a four-arm bandit
gambling task. Saliva samples were collected from all participants for
genomic DNA extraction and analyzed. Analysis of fMRI data using single-trial beta analysis revealed significant interactions between COMT genotype and BOLD activity in the vm-PFC and OPFC. Specifically, increased
activation in vmPFC and OPFC predicted choice for Val-homozygous individuals but not for Met-carriers. Our work shows that dopamine-related
polymorphisms influence the neural mechanisms underpinning exploration in humans.

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session A

A131
A MULTIMODAL STUDY OF DISGUST IN THE ULTIMATUM GAME
Filippo Rossi1, Veerle van Son2, Ian Fasel3, Marian Bartlett1,3, Alan Sanfey2; 1Institute for Neural Computation, University of California, San Diego, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University, 3Emotient, Inc., San
Diego — We present a novel approach to study neural activity associated

with the experience of disgust. Moreover, we show an application of this
methodology to the Ultimatum Game (UG), an economic task where players seem to experience moral disgust in response to small financial offers.
Using state-of-the-art computer vision techniques, we detected the facial
expression of disgust from 26 participants while they played the UG and
the Pictures Game (PG) in an fMRI scanner. In the PG, participants saw
neutral, positive or disgusting pictures from the International Affective
Picture System. The purpose of this task was to identify a distributed pattern of voxel activity associated with the emotion of disgust, which was
assessed using Emotient facial expression recognition software. We then
tested whether small financial offers in the UG activated the same neural
“fingerprint.” First, we were able to predict whether a picture was disgusting or not from a combination of voxels in the anterior insula, amygdala,
and caudate (cross-validation accuracy = 66%, p < 0.0001). Second, we
showed that the same multi-voxel pattern could accurately predict when
participants received small financial offers in the UG (cross-validation
accuracy = 64%; p< 0.0001). These results suggest that the experiences of
visual and moral disgust share a common neural substrate, which can be
identified using our approach. In the future, we will try to isolate multivoxel patterns associated with several emotions in order to investigate their
role in decision-making processes.

A132
ACTION SELECTION AS A CONTINUOUSLY BIASED PROCESS:
EVIDENCE FROM A RAPID REACHING TASK Cristian Buc Calderon1,
Tom Verguts2, Wim Gevers1; 1Centre for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Faculté de psychologie et sciences de l’éducation, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 2Department of Experimental Psychology,
Ghent University — When selecting an action, traditional theories suggest a
cognitive architecture made of serial processing units. Other authors have
suggested instead that action selection emerges from the parallel implementation of and competition between multiple action plans. To disentangle between these two hypotheses, we created a reaching task allowing
to assess the temporal dynamics of action selection. Crucially, contrary to
previous reaching task studies, our design did not force action selection
processes to operate in parallel, thus allowing an informative comparison
between the two theories. We manipulated the probability of congruence
between a cue and a delayed upcoming target reach go signal. This allowed
us to assess in an unbiased way if this congruence probability interacts with
a subsequently selected reach trajectory (i.e. whether there is co-activation
of cognition and action). We show that reach trajectories are modulated
by the probability of congruence between cue and target. Our results suggest that action selection emerges from a competition between multiple
afforded action plans, in parallel biased by relevant task factors (e.g. probability of reach).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

61

Poster Session B
ATTENTION: Development & aging
B1
AGE DIFFERENCES IN THE ATTENTION NETWORK TEST: EVIDENCE FROM BEHAVIOR AND ERPS Julia Spaniol1, Ryan S. Williams1,
Anna L. Biel2, Pete Wegier1, Leann K. Lapp1, Kathleen M. Lyons3, Benjamin J.
Dyson1; 1Ryerson University, 2Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, 3University
of Western Ontario — The Attention Network Test (ANT; Fan et al., 2002) is

widely used to examine the contributions of alerting, orienting, and executive control to attention. Behavioral studies comparing younger and older
adults on RT measures of attentional networks have suggested that age
deficits are more pronounced in executive control than in alerting or orienting, but no prior studies have examined the neural basis of age differences
in the ANT. In the current study, we obtained behavioral responses and
ERPs in the ANT from 24 healthy younger adults (mean age: 21.4 years)
and 24 healthy older adults (mean age: 65.1 years). Compared with younger
adults, older adults showed a reduced alerting effect on RT. Posterior cueevoked N1 amplitude, as well as target-evoked N1 and P3b amplitudes,
showed similar alerting effects in both age groups, but the effect of alerting on P3b latency was reduced in older adults. In contrast, older adults
showed a larger orienting effect on RT and on the posterior cue-evoked N1,
compared with younger adults. Orienting effects on target-evoked N1 and
P3b components were similar in both groups. Finally, age deficits in executive control were expressed behaviorally (greater slowing in the presence
of incongruent flankers) as well as neurally (increased flanker-based modulation, and more anterior distribution, of P3b). In summary, these findings
suggest that attentional networks show differential sensitivity to normal
aging. Older adults’ enhanced posterior orienting response, seen as early as
100ms post-cue, may reflect an over-reliance on spatial cues to compensate
for age-related decline in executive control.

B2
COGNITIVE TRAINING IMPROVES MOBILITY IN HEALTHY OLDER
ADULTS Lindsay Nagamatsu1, Nathan Medeiros-Ward1, Michael Kranz1, Pau1

1

1

1

1

line Baniqued , Cher Wee Ang , Anya Knecht , Kathryn Johnson , Arthur Kramer ;
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — With the number of adults aged

1

65 years and older expected to triple by the year 2050, developing effective
interventions to promote healthy and successful aging is an increasing priority. Improving mobility is especially relevant, given its role in functional
independence and quality of life. While mobility may be improved via
physical training, an alternative approach is to target cognitive functioning; indeed, cognition is known to be critical for balance and mobility, and
impaired cognitive functioning is a risk factor for falls in older adults. Hence,
we conducted a five-week cognitive intervention on older adults aged 60-80
years (n = 100) aimed at improving cognition and consequently, improving mobility. Participants completed cognitive and physical assessments at
baseline and trial completion, and were randomized into two groups: 1) a
training group that played computer games known to highly correspond to
working memory and reasoning abilities; or 2) a training group that played
computer games that did not reliably tap working memory and reasoning, but were related to performance on attention and perceptual speed
tasks. All participants completed a total of 15 hours of training. Mobility
was assessed via gait speed. We found that participants in the attentional/
perceptual group significantly improved their gait speed, in comparison to
the working memory/reasoning group. This suggests that attention and
perceptual speed may be particularly critical for mobility in older adults.
Our results may inform future intervention strategies to improve mobility
in older adults by providing evidence that cognitive training can positively
impact physical outcome measures.

B3
INCREASED EARLY PROCESSING OF TASK-IRRELEVANT AUDITORY STIMULI IN OLDER ADULTS Erich Tusch1, Anne Fox1, Fabio Porto1,
Brittany Alperin2, Phillip Holcomb3, Kirk Daffner1; 1Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2Oregon Health and Science Univeristy, 3Tufts University — Age-related increases in N1 amplitude to task-irrelevant auditory

stimuli have been interpreted as reflecting diminished inhibitory capacity. If so, one might predict that N1 amplitude would be augmented by
increasing task demands and attenuated in individuals with high executive capacity (EC). ERPs were measured in young, middle aged, youngold, and old-old adults, divided into high and average EC groups. Subjects
were exposed to auditory (repetitive pure tone, rare pure tone, rare novel)
and visual (repetitive letters, infrequent letters) stimuli. Under the auditory-ignore (visual-attend) condition, subjects ignored auditory stimuli and
responded to rare target letters under low and high task load. Under the
auditory-attend condition, subjects ignored visual stimuli and responded
to rare target tones. N1 amplitude to novel and repetitive auditory stimuli
was larger under the auditory-ignore condition for all age groups except
young adults. There was an age-related increase in N1 amplitude under
the auditory-ignore but not auditory-attend condition. EC modulated the
pattern of response only among old-old subjects. Increasing target number
under visual-attend was associated with a reduced N1 to task-irrelevant
auditory stimuli in all groups. In summary, the study’s findings do not
neatly fit the inhibitory-deficit hypothesis of cognitive aging. Augmenting
visual task load led to decreased, not increased N1 to task-irrelevant auditory events. Executive capacity played a limited role in modulating the N1
response. Older adults did not simply fail to suppress the N1 amplitude to
auditory stimuli in the task-irrelevant modality; they actually generated a
larger response than to identical stimuli in the task-relevant modality.

B4
ERP CORRELATES OF PROACTIVE AND REACTIVE ATTENTIONAL
CONTROL IN PRESCHOOL AND MIDDLE CHILDHOOD Sarah Elke1,
Tyler Harrison1, Aishah Abdul Rahman1, Sandra A. Wiebe1; 1University of Alberta
— The engagement of cognitive control can occur in two forms: reactive

control, where cognitive control is engaged as needed, and proactive
control, where cognitive control is engaged in anticipation of upcoming
demands. This study used event-related potentials to investigate the neural
correlates of these strategies in children. Younger children (n = 18, 4 and
5 year olds) and older children (n = 21, 7 and 8 year olds) completed a
cued task-switching paradigm. On each trial, children were presented with
a cue indicating whether to sort by colour or shape followed by a stimulus
to be sorted by the cued dimension, which children indicated on a touchscreen. Upon cue presentation, the task allowed children to prepare for the
upcoming trial (i.e., a proactive strategy) or wait until stimulus presentation to do so (i.e., a reactive strategy). The P3 was analyzed after both the
cue and the stimulus. Older children had better task performance and their
stimulus-evoked P3s had faster latencies than those of younger children.
Both age groups had larger stimulus-P3s in trials requiring a task switch
than in trials where the same task was performed consecutively. This difference may reflect increased working memory load on switch trials that
might have been avoided had children used a proactive strategy. Together,
these results suggest that both 4 and 5 year olds and 7 and 8 year olds used
a reactive strategy, with older children doing so more efficiently.

B5
SELECTIVE ATTENTION AS A PROTECTIVE FACTOR FOR NONVERBAL INTELLIGENCE IN LOWER SES CHILDREN: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS STUDY Elif Isbell1, Amanda Hampton Wray2, Helen
Neville1; 1University of Oregon, 2Michigan State University — Selective attention
is the ability to enhance the processing of particular input while suppressing the information from other concurrent sources and has been postulated
to be a foundational skill for learning and academic achievement. The
neural mechanisms of this foundational ability are both vulnerable and

62

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
enhanceable in children from lower socioeconomic status (SES) families.
Here we assessed the protective role of this malleable brain function for
nonverbal cognitive abilities in lower SES children. We recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) during a dichotic listening task and administered
nonverbal IQ tasks to 124 lower SES children (77 females) between the ages
of 40 and 67 months. The attention effect, i.e. the difference in ERP mean
amplitudes elicited by identical probes embedded in stories when attended
versus unattended, was significantly correlated with nonverbal IQ scores.
Overall, larger, more positive attention effects over the anterior and central
electrode locations were associated with higher nonverbal IQ scores. Our
findings provide initial evidence for prominent individual differences in
neural indices of selective attention in lower SES children. Based on these
findings, we propose that selective attention acts as a protective factor for
the development of nonverbal cognitive abilities in children from lower
SES families.

B6
DON’T PAY ATTENTION! PARADOXICAL EFFECTS OF MONETARY INCENTIVE ON ATTENTIONAL PERFORMANCE IN OLDER
ADULTS. Ziyong Lin1, Cindy Lusitg1; 1University of Michigan — Monetary incentives are often used to increase attention and performance, presumably by
increasing motivation. We examined how these effects vary across age
groups and types of attentional control. Young (M age = 20.2 yrs) and old
(M age = 70.7 yrs) adults were tested on the Continuous Temporal Expectancy Test with video distractor, which allows independent assessment of
focused attention, the ability to sustain that focus over time, and the ability
to resist distraction (Berry et al., 2014; Berry et al., in press). Within each
age group, half the participants were tested under standard conditions,
and half were tested under an incentive condition. In the incentive condition, participants could earn up to $20, with $.20 deducted for every error.
Replicating our previous studies, although both distraction and time-ontask effects reduced performance, the effects of distraction did not systematically increase with time-on-task. Older adults were more vulnerable to
distraction but not to time-on-task effects. The monetary incentive tended
to improve the performance of young adults, but significantly reduced the
performance of older adults. Incentive had its primary effects on focused
attention and overall performance rather than specific effects on either sustained attention or distraction control. Age and incentive condition also
influenced correlations between performance and self-report measures of
boredom, mind-wandering, and distractibility. Overall the effects suggest
that manipulations of motivation via monetary incentive have general
rather than ability-specific effects on attentional control, and these effects
may be paradoxical for older adults.

B7
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN IMPLICIT SEQUENCE LEARNING
Rebecca J. Campbell1, Alison Colbert1, Jin Bo1; 1Eastern Michigan University —
Motor learning occurs both implicitly, without awareness of knowledge
being acquired, and explicitly, in which individuals are aware that learning
is taking place. The “invariance learning hypothesis” (Reber, 1993) suggests
that the ability for implicit learning generates early and is impervious to
age effects. However, there have been inconsistent findings in the literature.
Some studies have found little to no age effect on implicit sequence learning
(e.g. Meulemans et al., 1998), while others have found a strong age effect
(e.g. Maybery et al., 1995). Such discrepancy could result from task difficulties of learning sequence and explicit awareness. Thus, the current study
examined age-related differences on implicit sequence learning in thirteen
typically developing children (aged 6 to 12). A serial reaction time task was
employed with ten blocks. Blocks 1, 2, 8 & 10 contained a baseline sequence
whereas Blocks 3 to 7 and 9 contained a 12-element learning sequence with
a different predictive structure than the baseline sequence. Learning was
measured as the response time (RT) differences between Block 7&8, Block
8&9, and Block 9&10. One sample t-tests revealed positive learning on RT
difference between Block 8&9 (t =1.95, p < 0.05). No significant age effects
were found on RT differences in Block 7&8 (r=.01, p=0.35) and Block 9&10
(r=.51, p=0.42). However, age effect on the RT difference on Block 8&9 was
approaching significance (r=.26, p=0.08). The preliminary analysis supports
the “invariance learning hypothesis”. Future research will include a larger
sample and children with motor difficulties such as autism.

Poster Session B

B8
THE INFLUENCE OF EXECUTIVE CAPACITY AND AGE ON ATTENTION TO NOVEL AUDITORY STIMULI Anne M. Fox1, Erich Tusch1, Fabio
Porto1, Brittany Alperin2, Phillip Holcomb3, Kirk R. Daffner1; 1Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2Oregon Health and Science University,
3
Tufts University — There is evidence that adults with higher executive capacity (EC) pay more attention to novel visual stimuli. The role of EC in processing novel auditory stimuli, however, has not been carefully examined.
This study measured ERPs at frontocentral sites in young, middle-aged,
young-old, and old-old subjects, who were divided into high and average EC groups based on neuropsychological testing. The P3a served as an
index of the allocation of attentional resources. Subjects were exposed to
both auditory (repetitive pure tone, rare pure tone, rare novel) and visual
(repetitive letters, infrequent letters) stimuli. Under the auditory-attend
condition, subjects were instructed to respond to rare target tones and
ignore visual stimuli. Under the auditory-ignore condition, subjects were
instructed to respond to rare visual target letters and ignore auditory stimuli. Results showed that the P3a to novel auditory stimuli was larger for
subjects with high than with average EC. At frontal sites, the magnitude
of this effect did not differ across age groups, while at central sites the EC
effect was much more robust in older subjects. An age-related linear decline
in the amplitude of the novelty P3a was observed at fronto-central sites
under the ignore, but not under the attend, condition. In summary, higher
EC was associated with increased appropriation of attentional resources to
novel auditory stimuli, a pattern of response preserved or even augmented
across the adult lifespan. These findings extend prior observations about
enhanced sensitivity to novelty of high EC individuals to include not only
visual, but also auditory, stimuli.

B9
A LONGITUDINAL INVESTIGATION OF ATTENTION NETWORKS
IN CHILDREN 6-11 YEARS OF AGE. Frances Lewis1, Katherine Johnson1, Robert Reeve1; 1School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne
— Attention is critical for everyday functioning, and consists of several

neural networks. The alerting network is involved in arousal, the orienting network is involved in selecting a modality and shifting attention,
while the executive network is involved in top-down control of attention.
The Attention Network Task (ANT) is a cued flanker task to assess these
networks. Forty-one 6-year-olds, 30 8-year-olds and 43 10-year-olds performed a modified adult version of the ANT three times over 12 months, at
6-monthly intervals. Ten-year-olds performed with a more efficient alerting
network than both 6- and 8-year-olds for mean response time (RT), and
a more efficient alerting network than 6-year-olds for errors and omissions at the first time point. The orienting network showed no difference
between age groups at any time point. 10-year-olds performed with a more
efficient executive network than 6-year-olds at the first two time points in
terms of errors, and at all time points in terms of omissions. Eight-yearolds performed with a more efficient executive network than 6-year-olds
for standard deviation of RT, and at the first two time points for errors
and omissions. Eight- and 10-year-olds performed with a more efficient
reorienting network than 6-year-for both errors and omissions at all time
points. Results indicate that the alerting network develops earlier than previously suggested. The executive network shows minimal development
past 7 years of age. Results support findings of an early development of
the orienting network. Six to 8 years of age is a critical period in attention
development.

B10
VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS ACROSS MEMORY SYSTEMS AND
AGING Sarah Reaves1, Shekinah Phillips2, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute
of Technology, 2Agnes Scott College — Visual short term memory (VSTM)
is a capacity-limited system that represents visual information after it is
no longer available via sensory input. Studies manipulating retrospective
attention (attention directed to previously viewed stimuli) have shown
that the contents of VSTM can be modulated by attentional control in
younger adults. Only one study has manipulated retrospective attention
in older adults while monitoring an event related potential (ERP) related
to working memory maintenance known as contralateral delay activity
(CDA) . Results from this previous study using a blocked design suggested
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

63

Poster Session B
that older adults could use retrospective cues to reduce working memory
demands, but older adults did not show behavioral benefits. The present
study manipulated retrospective attention pseudo-randomly across trials
while monitoring the CDA. Different from previous studies which used
colored squares as stimuli, the present study used images of real-world
objects, which was a novel stimulus class for detecting the CDA. This
allowed for testing the effects of retrospective attention on both VSTM and
long-term memory. Results revealed a benefit at both working memory
and long-term memory for retrospectively cued items. Contrary to previous evidence, this suggests that older adults’ behavioral performance can
be improved via retrospective attention. The present study also detected a
CDA using complex images. This suggests that the CDA can index complex
representations held in visual working memory. Additionally, the fact that
retrospective attention influenced both working memory and long-term
memory suggests that memory systems may be more interactive than previously thought and that this interaction persists with aging.

ATTENTION: Multisensory
B11
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN EARLY AND LATE HAND PROXIMITY EFFECTS ON VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIALS Catherine Reed1,
Abigail Kramer2, Summer Clay3, David Leland4, Alan Hartley5; 1Claremont McKenna College, 2Pitzer College, 3Claremont Graduate University, 4University of
Wisconsin, Eu Claire, 5Scripps College — The present study examined age-re-

lated differences in the influence of hand location on visual processing. For
young adults, previous research has shown that by the time stimuli are
categorized as relevant/irrelevant for action, the proprioceptive effects of
the hand on visual attention are selective for goal/task-related stimuli. At
the same time, hand proximity appears to bias attention early, starting with
a facilitation of processing for perhaps any visual stimuli near the hand,
and continuing with enhancements that are selective to those stimuli categorized as task-relevant. Here we examined age-related changes in this
multisensory integration by comparing event-related potentials (ERPs)
between younger (average age~ 19) and older (average age~ 70) adults.
We used a visual detection task in which the hand was placed near or kept
far from target and non-target stimuli that were matched for frequency
and visual features. The presence of the hand near the stimuli produced
faster response times in both age groups. However, the hand’s influence on
ERPs was different for younger and older adults. Younger adults showed
increased amplitudes for visual stimuli early in processing but older adults
only showed hand effects later in processing. In addition, for older adults
activity was distributed not only in contralateral parietal regions but also in
frontal regions. This neural pattern suggests that older adults may integrate
hand position and visual inputs using top-down mechanisms to a relatively
greater extent than younger adults.

B12
SALIENT SOUNDS ELICIT SLOW POTENTIAL SHIFTS PARALLELED
BY ALPHA RHYTHM DESYNCHRONIZATION IN CONTRALATERAL
VISUAL CORTEX Viola S. Störmer1, Wenfeng Feng2, Antigona Martinez3,4,
John J. McDonald5, Steven A. Hillyard3; 1Harvard University, USA, 2SooChow University, Jiangsu, China, 3University of California San Diego, USA, 4Nathan Cline
Institute for Psychiatric Research, USA, 5Simon Fraser University, Canada — We

previously showed that sudden sounds activate human visual cortex automatically. By recording the brain’s electrophysiological responses using
EEG, we found that peripheral, task-irrelevant sounds triggered a contralateral positive deflection over visual cortex (termed the ACOP), even in
purely auditory tasks (McDonald et al., 2013). Importantly, the magnitude
of the ACOP predicted improved perceptual processing of a subsequent
visual target, revealing its functional significance for cross-modal effects
of attention (Feng et al., 2014). Here, we examined whether task-irrelevant
sounds also modulate alpha-band (9-14Hz) oscillatory activity over visual
cortex, and discovered a relative decrease in alpha power contralateral to
the sound. These data suggest that sounds prepare the visual system for the
potential processing of subsequent visual targets by biasing the alpha-band
oscillatory activity in the visual processing pathways in a spatially specific
manner. Importantly, we observed these lateralized changes in alpha-band

64

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
activation in tasks that were purely auditory, demonstrating the reflexive
nature of this effect. Interestingly, these lateralized changes in alpha power
correlated with the ACOP magnitude in a trial-by-trial manner, such that
trials with larger ACOPs were associated with stronger decreases in contralateral alpha power. These changes in alpha-band oscillatory activity are
strikingly similar to lateralized changes in alpha-band power previously
reported in studies of voluntary attention. Thus, the present data reveal an
important link between the neural mechanisms underlying voluntary and
involuntary attention.

B13
LEVELS OF PROCESSING DIFFERENTIALLY INFLUENCE VISUAL
AND AUDITORY MEMORY DISTORTIONS Ryan Brigante1, Kristen
Deupree1, Eric Slinker1, Bart Rypma1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Boundary

extension (BE) is a function of visuospatial cognition in which scenes are
remembered with extra content in the periphery. However, auditory memories tend to become truncated at the boundaries, so listeners are unaware of
changes in the beginning and end of an auditory stream. Boundary restriction (BR) is considered normal in the auditory domain, but like visuospatial
BE, there is much variability in the data. An open question is, does BE/BR
occur at the perceptual or semantic representational level? We conducted
two separate experiments (one visual and one auditory) with levels-of-processing manipulations during initial encoding of stimuli and examined
the rate of memory distortions that emerged in a recognition task. In the
visual experiment, encoding tasks were judging colorfulness (perceptual)
and personal relevance (semantic). In the auditory experiment, the tasks
were counting beats (perceptual) and judging conveyed emotion (semantic). In the recognition phase, half of all stimuli were manipulated at the
boundaries. Participants had to judge whether each stimulus was extended,
restricted, or the same. In the visual experiment, there was a main effect of
error type, as BE was significantly more frequent than BR. Critically, there
was an interaction of error type and encoding task; BE was more frequent
with conceptually-encoded stimuli, but BR was more frequent with perceptually-encoded stimuli. In the auditory experiment, we found the opposite
pattern; BE was more frequent with perceptually-encoded stimuli, but BR
was more frequent with conceptually-encoded stimuli. These results suggest that visual and auditory BE arise from different cognitive mechanisms.

B14
SHALL I STAY OR SHALL I GO? RAPID DECISION TO ALLOCATE
ATTENTION – OR NOT – TO INCOMING STIMULI IN THE VENTRO-LATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX: AN INTRACEREBRAL EEG
STUDY Anne Claire Croize1,2, JR Vidal3,4, M Baciu3,4, M Petton6,7, L Minotti1,2,5,
P Kahane1,2,5, JP Lachaux6,7, M Perrone-Bertolotti3,4; 1Inserm, U836, F-38000
Grenoble, France, 2Univ. Grenoble Alpes, GIN, F-38000 Grenoble, France, 3CNRS,
LPNC, UMR 5105, F-38040 Grenoble, France, 4Grenoble Alpes University, LPNC,
F-38040 Grenoble, France, 5Grenoble Alpes University, LPNC, F-38040 Grenoble,
France, 6Service de Neurologie, CHU de Grenoble, Hôpital Michallon, F-38000
Grenoble, France, 7INSERM, U1028, CNRS, UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience
Research Center, Brain Dynamics and Cognition Team, Lyon F-69000, France,
8
University Lyon 1, Lyon F-69000, France — In the brain, the decision to allocate attention to an incoming stimulus - and to trigger the cascade of highlevel processes which follow - must be taken carefully as it creates transient
windows of unavailability to subsequent stimuli. In this study, we set to
identify brain regions which carry out such decision, based on the following set of constraints : a) such “gate-keepers” should react to a stimulus
earlier than 250 ms, that is before the classic divergence between attentive
vs inattentive processing in high-level brain regions (i.e., Broca or Wernicke
for text stimuli); b) they should be part of a flexible memory system in the
prefrontal cortex where rules differentiating between context-dependent
relevant vs. irrelevant items are known to be maintained (Sakai, 2008).
To have the sufficient time and spatial resolution to test those criteria, we
used intracranial EEG in epileptic patients implanted in the frontal lobes as
they performed several tasks, including a reading task contrasting to-be-attended vs. to-be-ignored words, a visual oddball task, a visual search, and
working memory tasks. From the combination of those tasks, and the measure of High-Frequency Activity [50-150 Hz] as a proxy of population-level
spiking activity (Lachaux et al., 2012), we identified neural populations in

2015 Annual Meeting
the left and right Ventro-Lateral Prefrontal Cortex (VLPFC) as the best possible candidates for an “attentional gate-keeper”, within the so-called ventral attentional network (Corbetta et al, 2008).

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
B15
BIPOLAR DISORDER: ANALYSIS OF SUBCORTICAL STRUCTURES
INVOLVED IN EMOTIONAL AND REWARD PROCESSING AND THE
EFFECTS OF WIDELY PRESCRIBED MEDICATIONS. Christopher R. K.
Ching1,2, Derrek P. Hibar2, Neda Jahanshad2, Adam Mezher2, Joshua Faskowitz2,
Benson Mwangi3, Jair Soares3, Paul M. Thompson2; 1University of California Los
Angeles, 2Imaging Genetics Center, University of Southern California, 3University of Texas Medical School — Few studies have compared neuroimaging

measures across bipolar subtypes I and II (BD1, BD2) and not otherwise
specified (BD NOS). In a large cohort scanned with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), we hypothesized that bipolar subtype would be associated
with volumetric differences in subcortical structures involved in emotional
and reward processing and that commonly prescribed treatments might
affect subcortical volumes. Brain T1-weighted MRI data were segmented
using FreeSurfer to compute 8 subcortical volumes including the nucleus
accumbens, amygdala, caudate, hippocampus, putamen, pallidum, thalamus and lateral ventricles. After quality control, 479 subjects were analyzed
(BD1=185; BD2=67; BD NOS=44; Control=183). We assessed the relationship of diagnosis to subcortical volumes using multiple linear regression,
correcting for age, sex and intracranial volume. Effects of lithium, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, atypical antipsychotics and benzodiazepines
were also tested in a subgroup of medicated subjects. BD2 youths (<21yrs)
had nominally smaller thalamic and ventricular volumes compared to controls. BD NOS youths showed a trend toward smaller putamen volumes
compared to BD1 and smaller right thalamus volumes compared to BP2.
For medicated subjects, smaller putamen, pallidum, left amygdala and
right thalamus volumes were associated with use of antipsychotics. Subjects on benzodiazepines had nominally smaller putamen and right pallidum volumes compared to non-medicated subjects. Our study revealed
both bipolar subtype specific volume differences and associations between
medication and subcortical volumes. To combat patient heterogeneity, our
ENIGMA Bipolar Working Group is extending this analysis to over 4,000
subjects and is examining disease subtype and medication interactions with
increasing power.

B16
PREFRONTAL CORTEX ACTIVATION DURING AN EMOTIONAL
STROOP TASK: A NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY (NIRS)
STUDY Keara Kangas1, Robert Torrence1, Joshua Carlson1; 1Northern Michigan
University — Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) research measuring pre-

frontal cortex (PFC) activity during emotional processing has been limited. Studies showed cortical activation during an attention task measuring affective picture processing in the occipital lobe using NIRS, EEG, and
fMRI, but little is known about visuospatial attention during an emotional
Stroop task, which measures selective attention to emotional stimuli. The
present study used NIRS to measure the temporal dynamics of the PFC
during an emotional Stroop task. This task consisted of threating/fearful
and neutral images from the International Affective Picture System. The
images had either a red, green, or blue border, in which the participant
was instructed to respond too by using a colored keypad. An increased
hemodynamic response is expected during emotional trials, bilaterally in
the PFC, due to prefrontal interference processing during this condition.
We also expect to see slower response times during the emotional trials.
The current NIRS data suggest that the PFC is differentially involved in
interference processing during affective and neutral conditions. The neural
affect was correlated with the behavioral aspect, which was accompanied
by slower reaction times for emotional compared to neutral stimuli. Thus
suggesting the PFC is involved in emotional processing of visuospatial
attention to emotional stimuli, showing stronger brain activation during
emotional trials due to interference.

Poster Session B

B17
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE DOWN-REGULATION OF SUFFERING Spencer Reuter1; 1Edgewood College — Pain is a complex, multidimensional event and recent research has attempted to dissociate the sensory
and affective components of pain; the latter often regarded as suffering. It is
possible to dissociate pain from suffering because suffering can be subject
to cognitive and affective reappraisal. The purpose of this study is to understand individual differences in the regulation of suffering by correlating
physiological measures of distress with self-report measures designated to
assess self-regulation and perceived self-control. Physiological measures
collected include heart rate (HR), facial movements, skin conductance
response (SCR) and body temperature. Participants were exposed to 20
thermal pain stimuli from a Medoc Neurosensory Analyzer, a device that
heats water up to 48C. After each pain stimulus, participants used a sliding
scale to report pain intensity and unpleasantness and answered a portion
of the Attributional Style Questionnaire (ASQ) to assess learned helplessness. Variables of interest for assessing individual differences included
locus of control, learned helplessness, pain catastrophizing and meditation
experience. Preliminary data suggest a negative correlation between rate of
down-regulation after a painful stimulus and learned helplessness. Slower
down-regulation of pain is also associated with a more externalized locus
of control. Overall, these findings suggest that suffering is modified by an
individual’s sense of control. Future studies should investigate whether
self-regulation techniques such as mindfulness meditation or therapeutic
interventions such as mindfulness based cognitive therapy (MBCT) can
modify the affective components of the pain response.

B18
EFFECTS OF CUEING ON SEMANTIC MEMORY IN PARKINSON’S
DISEASE WITH COMORBID DEPRESSION Anisa Marshall1, Michelle
Fenesy2, Kathleen Poston1; 1Stanford University, 2UCLA — Semantic memory

impairment is common in Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients. Several studies have reported PD patients improve memory with cueing compared to
free recall, and similar cueing improvements have been shown in people
with depression. Because depressive symptoms are prevalent in PD, clarifying the relationship between PD-associated semantic memory impairment and PD-associated depression is critical in interpreting neuropsychological testing. In this study, we aimed to determine if differing depression
severity in PD patients influenced improvement in semantic memory
during cued recall (CR) compared to free recall (FR). We administered the
California Verbal Learning Test Second Edition (CVLT-II) to 59 PD patients
with differing depression severity. We used the Beck Depression Inventory-II to determine depression severity according to published criteria:
non-depressed 0-13 (n=41), mildly depressed 14-19 (n=9), and moderately-to-severely depressed > 19 (n=9). The three groups were age-and education-matched. We compared the CVLT-II short-delay FR, short-delay
CR, long-delay FR, and long-delay CR between groups. We also compared
memory improvements with cueing compared to free recall (CR minus
FR) between groups. Using one-way ANOVA, there were no between
group differences in performance on individual tests; however, we found
between group differences during long-delay CR minus FR (p=.007). On
post-hoc Tukey HSD analysis cueing improved performance only in the
mildly depressed PD patients, compared to the non-depressed (p=0.008)
and the moderately-to-severely depressed PD patients (p=.018). Our results
help elucidate the effects of depression in PD on semantic memory, allowing for a more accurate interpretation of standard neuropsychological
assessments.

B19
A MEG STUDY ON THE BRAIN ACTIVITY IN PROCESSING FACES
WITH EMOTIONAL EXPRESSIONS Pei-Shu Tsai1, Ming-Chun Lee2, Daisy
L. Hung4,5, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng5,6, Denise H. Wu4,7, Shih-tseng Tina Huang2,3; 1Graduate Institute of Translation and Interpretation, National Changhua University of
Education, 2Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, 3Center
for Cognitive Sciences, National Chung-Cheng University, 4Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience, National Central University, 5Institute of Neuroscience, National
Yang-Ming University, 6The Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, 7Laboratories for Cognitive Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University — The present
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

65

Poster Session B
research attempted to examine the brain activation in processing faces
with emotional expressions. Twenty adults (10 males and 10 females, age
ranged from 19 to 29) with normal or corrected normal vision and reported
no abnormal neurological history participated. In the study, faces of seven
basic emotions were tested in separate blocks and presented in pairs. The
participants were asked to judge if the two faces in each trial were identical
as in the same emotion or as from the same person. Results found the brain
activation of person identity task was significant higher than those of the
emotion task in premotor cortex and supplementary motor cortex (BA6),
somatosensory association cortex(BA7) and right cerebrum at 60-90ms after
onset of the stimuli. The activation of the second faces were higher than
those of the first faces in insular cortex, supramarginal gyrus, and right
Cerebrum at 240-290ms. We found early activation at 60-90ms in processing
female faces were higher in BA7, V2, and dorsal posterior cingulate cortex,
whereas processing male faces were higher in fusiform gyrus, anterior prefrontal cortex, and right cerebrum. Further analysis found at 240-275ms in
processing female faces higher than in male faces in BA6 and insular cortex.
The results suggested that a non-conscious perception of male and female
emotional expressions which is implemented at early stage of processing.
Furthermore, it was found that higher activation in processing female facial
expressions in motor and insular cortex than in male faces in later stage.

B20
OVARIAN HORMONE LEVELS PREDICT INTRINSIC CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN SALIENCE AND DEFAULT MODE NETWORKS Joseph
Andreano1,2,3, Alexandra Touroutoglou4,2,3, Nicole Betz5, Bradford Dickerson4,2,3,
Lisa Feldman Barrett1,2,3,5; 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Psychiatry, 2Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 3Harvard Medical
School, 4Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Neurology, 5Northeastern University, Department of Psychology — Converging evidence suggests that

ovarian hormone fluctuations over the course of the menstrual cycle can
influence susceptibility to mood disorders in women. Similarly, ovarian
hormone fluctuations also influence the modulation of memory by affect.
Mood disorders and affective memory modulation have each separately
been associated with the strength of intrinsic connectivity between nodes
within two of the brain’s intrinsic networks, the salience network and
default mode network. This raises the possibility that changes in ovarian
hormone levels may influence the degree of intrinsic connectivity between
these two networks. To test this hypothesis, we investigated whether there
are brain regions within the default mode network whose intrinsic connectivity with the amygdala (a node of the salience network) is correlated with
estrogen and progesterone levels. The same procedure was used to identify
regions of the salience network whose connectivity with the hippocampus
(a node of the default mode network) was correlated with estrogen and
progesterone levels. The results indicated that amygdala connectivity with
default mode structures was correlated with both estrogen and progesterone levels. Similarly, hippocampal connectivity with salience network
structures was also correlated with estrogen and progesterone. These findings indicate that ovarian hormone levels modulate the degree of communication between intrinsic networks involved in affect and memory. This
ovarian modulation of connectivity may explain menstrual cycle effects on
susceptibility to mood disorders.

B21
PERCEPTUAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
GENUINE AND POSED EMOTIONAL VOCALIZATIONS Sinead HY
Chen1, Samuel Evans1, César Lima1,2, Naiara Demnitz1, Sophie Scott1; 1Institute
of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 2Faculty of Psychology and
Education, University of Porto — In social interactions, the ability to understand whether emotional expressions are genuinely felt is important for
understanding the social intentions of others. In this study, twenty-four
adult participants (twelve female) passively listened to recordings of genuine and posed emotional expressions (40 laughs (positive emotion), 20 genuine and 20 posed; 40 cries (negative emotion), 20 genuine and 20 posed)
while pupil diameter was measured. In a separate session, participants were
asked to rate the emotional sounds on a 7-point Likert scale for the degree
to which they perceived the sounds as authentic, contagious, arousing, and
the degree to which the speakers were in control of their emotional expression. Participants’ pupils dilated significantly more when they were listen-

66

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
ing to authentic as compared to posed emotional expressions (p<.001), and
showed significant pupil dilation for authentic emotional expressions two
to five seconds after sound onsets(p<.001). In behavioural testing, authentic
emotional expressions were rated to be higher in authenticity, arousal and
show less control than posed ones (p<.001), and positive expressions were
rated as more authentic and arousing, and show less control than negative ones (p<.001). In addition, authentic positive expressions were rated
to be higher in arousal, contagious, and less in control than negative ones
(p<.001). Our results suggest that listeners are indeed able to differentiate
genuine from posed positive and negative emotional expressions, consistent with pupillometry results. However, the absence of an emotion difference in pupil responses shows a discrepancy between overt behavioural
ratings and physiological process.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
B22
EMOTIONAL AND MOVEMENT-RELATED BODY POSTURES MODULATE VISUAL PROCESSING Khatereh Borhani1, Caterina Bertini1, Martin
Maier1,2, Alessio Avenanti1,3, Elisabetta Làdavas1; 1University of Bologna, 2Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, 3IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia — Human

body postures convey useful information to understand others’ emotions
and intentions. To investigate at which stage of visual processing emotional and movement-related information conveyed by observed bodies
is discriminated, we examined event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by
laterally-presented images of bodies with static postures, and implied-motion bodies with neutral, fearful or happy expressions. At the early stage
of visual structural encoding (N190), we found a different sensitivity of
the two hemispheres to observed body postures. Specifically, the right
hemisphere showed a N190 modulation both for the motion content (i.e.,
all the observed postures implying body movements elicited greater N190
amplitudes compared to static postures) and for the emotional content (i.e.,
fearful postures elicited the largest N190 amplitude), while the left hemisphere showed a modulation only for the motion content. In contrast, at
a later stage of perceptual representation, reflecting selective attention to
salient stimuli, an increased early posterior negativity (EPN) was observed
for fearful stimuli in both hemispheres, suggesting an enhanced processing
of motivationally relevant stimuli. The observed modulations, both at the
early stage of structural encoding and at later timing, suggest the existence
of a specialized perceptual mechanism tuned for emotion and action-related information derived by human body postures.

B23
SEX DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL RESPONSE TO MONETARY LOSS
DURING ADOLESCENCE Catherine Fassbender1, Cynthia Krafft1, Daniel
Hawes2, Ana-Maria Iosif1, Wouter van den Bos3, Stephen Hinshaw4, Amanda
Guyer1, Samuel McClure2, Julie Schweitzer1; 1UC Davis, 2Stanford University, 3Max
Planck Institute, Berlin, 4UC Berkley — Risk taking is increased during adoles-

cence compared to childhood and adulthood. Moreover, males are more
likely to display adolescent risk taking than females. One potential basis
for risk taking is differential responsiveness to rewards and punishments
generally, independent of explicit risk considerations. We measured neural
activity following unpredictable monetary gains and losses in adolescent
males and females to determine whether brain responses to reinforcers
differ by sex. For 49 adolescents (ages 12-18; 24 males, 25 females) we investigated neural activity in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) during the evaluation of probabilistic outcomes from a well-studied number-guessing task
(Delgado, 2000). The NAcc was chosen as the primary region of interest
because of its strong association with value-based decision-making, including risk assessment. Both sexes exhibited sustained increases of NAcc activity after gains, with no significant difference between them. However, there
was a significant difference between males and females in response to loss
feedback, t(47)=2.64, p=.011: only females exhibited the expected pattern of
decreasing NAcc activity. Adolescent males, on the other hand, exhibited
reduced neural sensitivity to losses during the evaluation of probabilistic
punishment, which was also supported by behavioral performance in a
separate risk-taking task (Lejeuz et al., 2002). For the latter, the sexes did not
differ in overall amount of risk-taking, but females took significantly lower
risks than males on trials immediately following losses, t(47)=2.67, p=.01.

2015 Annual Meeting
Overall, differential increases in risk-taking behaviors for male and female
adolescents may be rooted in reduced sensitivity of adolescent males to the
experience of undesirable outcomes.

B24
VERBAL INSTRUCTIONS VERSUS ACTUAL EXPERIENCE: TWO
DIFFERENT NEURAL PATHWAYS TO THE ACQUISITION OF FEAR
Senne Braem1, Jelle Demanet1, Raffael Kalisch2, Jan De Houwer1, Marcel Brass1;
1
Ghent University, 2Johannes Gutenberg Universität — In this fMRI study, we

aimed at uncovering the brain regions that mirror the acquisition of merely
instructed versus experienced fear. To this end, we administered a fear conditioning paradigm where participants were instructed that two out of three
visual stimuli could be followed by an electric shock. However, during the
training phase, participants were told that electric shocks following one of
these two stimuli would be replaced by a placeholder — under the false
pretense that this would allow them to gradually adjust to the aversive task
conditions. In contrast, the other stimulus was occasionally paired with
a shock. In the test phase, participants were re-instructed that now both
stimuli could be followed by a shock, while in fact, no more shocks were
distributed. We replicate earlier findings by demonstrating that fear ratings
during the test phase were initially higher for the experienced versus merely
instructed fear stimulus. Furthermore, the imaging data document a differential recruitment of the striatum being more active during the acquisition
experienced fear, and the inferior frontal sulcus which was most active
during merely instructed fear. Moreover, we demonstrate how the activity
in the inferior frontal sulcus during instructed fear in the training phase
correlated with fear ratings for the same stimulus in the later test phase.
Our results demonstrate how different neural pathways are involved in
the acquisition of experienced versus merely instructed fear associations.

B25
FOOD BRAND PREFERENCES MODULATE NEURAL RESPONSES
TO ADVERTISEMENTS IN MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Kristina Rapuano1, Andrea Wosham1, James Sargent1,2, Todd Heatherton1, William
Kelley1; 1Dartmouth College, Hanover NH USA, 2Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon NH USA — Despite the ubiquity of food advertisements, little

is known about how the brain represents brand preferences (e.g., McDonalds vs. Burger King) across individuals. The current study sought to investigate (1) the strength of individuals’ brand preferences on brain responses
to food advertisements, and (2) whether the strength of this modulation
predicts individual differences in body fat. While undergoing fMRI, participants viewed food and non-food (control) advertisements and performed
an unrelated incidental judgment task (indoor/outdoor discriminations).
Following scanning, participants rated their preferences for each brand on
a scale from 1 to 7. Body fat measurements were obtained with a Tanita
bioelectric impedance scale. Subjects’ brand preferences were included in a
multiple regression to identify brain regions whose activity increased with
increasing brand preference. Several regions were found to track with food
brand preferences, including the mPFC, dorsal striatum, and visual perception and attention areas. In order to identify whether activity in these
regions influence adiposity, activity in regions specific for food brand preference was correlated with subjects’ body fat measurements. The mPFC
was the only brain region to predict individual differences in body fat—
individuals with strong brand-preference activity in the mPFC were those
individuals with higher body fat measurements. These results suggest that
the mPFC, a region involved in self-referential processing, may represent
the personal salience of reward cues and may reflect an additional motivational signal that contributes to unhealthy eating behavior.

B26
IMPACT OF CONTEXT AND AFFECTIVE QUALITY ON THE REPRESENTATIONAL STRUCTURE OF VISUAL IMAGES IN BRAIN AND
BEHAVIOR Marcie King1, Dwight Kravitz1,2, Chris Baker1; 1Laboratory of Brain
and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health/NIH, 2The George Washington
University — fMRI has revealed brain regions selective for certain concrete

categories of visual stimuli (e.g. faces, scenes, and objects). However, this
work has largely focused on how these regions represent object identity
or category and typically use images of isolated objects in the absence of
any context. The current study extends our understanding of how complex

Poster Session B
visual stimuli are represented in the brain and in behavior by examining
how context and the affective quality of the object modulate these representations. Participants viewed 144 diverse images, spanning a wide range of
concrete categories and varying in affective quality (e.g. images of smiling
people, broken dishes, rainy landscape, etc.), while they were scanned on
a 7T MRI scanner. Following the scan, participants completed a one-hour
behavioral session in which they spatially arranged all 144 images according to their general perceived similarity. We directly compared the neural
space of the images (determined by similarities in neural responses in different brain regions between individual stimuli) with the perceived similarity of the images (determined as a measure of the distance between any
pairs of individual stimuli in the behavioral data). Our results show that the
representation of complex images is stable across independent sets of stimuli with the same affective quality, and that the neural representation of
these images in visual cortex is predictive of behavioral grouping. Importantly, however, the precise representational structure is strongly modulated by the affective quality of the images, both in brain and behavior.

B27
MODULATING THE INTENTIONAL STANCE THROUGH NONINVASIVE BRAIN STIMULATION OF THE ANTERIOR PARACINGULATE
CORTEX Eric J. Blumberg1,2, Raja Parasuraman1,2, Amanda Hanelli1, Eva
Wiese1,2; 1George Mason University, 2Center of Excellence in Neuroergonomics,
Technology, and Cognition (CENTEC) — Attending to where others look (i.e.,

gaze cueing) is a fundamental mechanism of social cognition and has been
shown to be modulated by beliefs about whether changes in gaze direction
are caused by an agent with a mind (e.g., human) or by an agent without
a mind (e.g., robot) – a mechanism commonly referred to as adopting the
intentional stance. Previous studies have shown that taking the intentional
stance in social interactions is associated with activation in the anterior
paracingulate cortex (PCC; Gallagher & Frith, 2003). Therefore, stimulating this brain region with transcranial direct current stimulation provides
a unique method to investigate the causal role of the PCC for modulating
low-level mechanisms of social cognition, such as gaze cueing. Electrodes
were placed on EEG scalp location FZ (anode) and F9 (cathode) following
current model predictions of optimal current flow through the PCC. Participants (N=14) were randomly assigned to one of two conditions while they
performed a gaze cueing task: active stimulation at 2mA for 30 minutes
or a sham control (2mA ramp-up and immediate ramp-down). Each participant completed 404 trials (202 trials with each agent type; human- or
robot-face) during both baseline and stimulation blocks. Anodal stimulation significantly increased the gaze-cueing effect (average invalid reaction
time minus average valid reaction time) for the human face but not for the
robot face. Sham stimulation did not affect gaze-cueing performance in
either agent. The results provide compelling evidence that the PCC plays a
causal role in modulating basic mechanisms of social cognition.

B28
NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF DISTINCT DEPRESSIVE PHENOMENA IN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE Kelly A. Gola1, Babu
Adhimoolam1, Brianne M. Bettcher1, Virginia E. Sturm1, Suzanne M. Shdo1, Joel
H. Kramer1, Bruce L. Miller1, Katherine P. Rankin1; 1University of California, San
Francisco — Though depression has been associated with neurostructural

abnormalities, few studies have shown causal effects of focal brain damage
on specific depressive phenomenology, and fewer differentiate cortical
from subcortical contributions. To disambiguate how specific depressive
symptoms arise from focal patterns of gray matter volume loss, we examined 223 neurodegenerative and healthy subjects [51 Alzheimer’s Disease
(AD), 66 behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTDs) patients,
106 Healthy Controls (NCs)]. Depressive symptoms were assessed using
the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Grey matter correlates of symptoms
were assessed using voxel-based morphometry (VBM) analysis using age,
gender, disease severity, scantype and total intracranial volume as covariates. Depressive symptoms were elevated in ADs and bvFTDs relative to
controls. Dysphoria predicted volume loss in the right superior temporal
lobe (T=4.99), hopelessness predicted left cerebellum Crus 1 and left thalamus volume loss (T=5.08), and apathy predicted left cerebellum Crus
1 volume loss (T=4.93; p<0.05, FWE corrected). Our findings are consistent with emerging evidence that the cerebellum plays an important role
in motivation and emotion regulation. Additionally, they inform existing

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

67

Poster Session B
neurobiological models of depression that implicate dysfunctional cortical-subcortical circuitry. We found that cortical and subcortical regions
differentially predicted distinct depression symptoms, thus highlighting
the importance of careful phenotypic quantification in understanding brain
contributions to neuropsychiatric syndromes.

B29
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL NEURAL CORRELATES OF COMMUNICATION IMPAIRMENT IN CHRONIC TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURY Arianna Rigon1, Michelle W. Voss1, Melissa C. Duff1; 1The University of
Iowa — Although impairment in interpersonal communication is common
following traumatic brain injury (TBI), techniques to characterize the
neural systems involved in the impairment have lagged behind. We used
the LaTrobe Communication Questionnaire to assess communication quality in individuals with TBI (N=20) as perceived by the patients themselves
(Self-Report; LCQ-S) and by a close other (Other-Report LCQ-O). As two
dimensions measured by the LCQ are sensitivity to the partner’s need and
ability to inhibit impulsive behaviors during conversation, we examined
the correlation between LCQ scores and fMRI measured resting-state functional connectivity (RS-FC) in the Mentalizing Network (MN), important
for inference of mental states, and in the Executive Network (EN), which
has been found to support executive functioning. TBI patients’ communication quality measured by LCQ-O correlated negatively with RS-FC
between dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and right (r=-.748, p<.01)
and left (r=-.842, p<.01) insulae; these regions are thought to collaborate in
mediation and switching between internally and externally oriented large
scale brain networks, skills necessary to successfully navigate the social
environment. Conversely, TBI individuals with higher self-perceived communication abilities had more RS-FC between the MN and dACC (r=.669,
p<.01). Additionally, we used diffusion tensor imaging to measure axonal
damage, and we found that global white matter integrity negatively correlated with the difference between LCQ-S and LCQ-O scores, a measure
of TBI patients’ awareness of the quality of their social communication (r=.74, p<.01). Our findings suggest that DTI and RS-FC might prove useful in
identifying biomarkers for predicting communicative outcomes following
TBI.

B30
RELATIONS BETWEEN ANXIETY SENSITIVITY AND EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS FROM A GAMBLING FEEDBACK TASK Nicholas
Allan1, Adreanna Massey2, Brian J Albanese1, Carson A Sutton1, Matthew Bachman2, Brad Schmidt1, Edward M Bernat2; 1Florida State University, 2University of
Maryland — Anxiety sensitivity (AS), or the fear of anxiety and the accom-

panying anxious arousal, is a multifaceted risk factor for anxiety pathology. AS comprises a general factor as well as more specific physical, cognitive, and social concerns dimensions. In recent years, efforts have been
made to investigate neurophysiological mechanisms underlying processes
associated with AS. The current study assesses individual differences in
AS in relation to event-related potential (ERP) activity collected during a
common gambling feedback task (Gehring and Willoughby, 2002). Recent
work from our group has delineated a response in theta which is increased
to losses (consistent with the feedback-negativity [FN]) from a response in
delta which is increased to gains (e.g. Bernat et al., 2011). The current study
was designed to examine the relations between general and specific self-reported AS factors (Taylor et al., 2007) and time-frequency principal components indexing theta and delta gambling feedback ERP activity in a sample
of 70 participants (M age = 36.4 years, SD = 15.92; 43.4% male) with elevated
risk status for anxiety (data collection is ongoing). Results indicated that
AS was positively associated with delta-gain as well as theta-loss parameters. Importantly, some degree of specificity was detected in the relations
between specific AS dimensions and delta and theta parameters. The current study presents an important step in understanding neurophysiological
systems associated with self-report AS parameters.

B31
ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION MODULATE BRAIN ACTIVITY TO
MEANINGFUL AND EMOTIONAL WORDS Lowri Hadden1,2, Debra
Mills1; 1Bangor University, 2Liverpool University — The maintenance of anxiety and depressive disorders is related to cognitive and emotional biases.

68

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
Yet, the relative contribution of semantics and emotion in sustaining these
biases remain entangled. The current study used event-related potentials
to address how people who score low versus high on scales of anxiety/
depression (AD) process valenced semantic and emotional words. Semantic and emotional processing were examined separately using written word
pairs in a priming paradigm. Emotionally valenced targets (positive, negative or neutral) were primed to be semantically and affectively related,
semantically unrelated, or affectively unrelated. When all participants were
considered together, semantic and affective conditions modulated brain
activity differentially; with an N400 effect for semantics and a Late Positive
Potential (LPC) for emotion. However for participants who scored high on
AD, interactions with valence significantly influenced both semantic and
emotional processing. We propose that an LPC to semantic incongruencies
is a neurophysiological marker for anxiety/depression indexing abnormal
processing of positively valenced stimuli. Difficulty integrating positive
meaning is consistent with low positive affect, negative schemas and could
be associated with maintaining the disorders.

B32
INDIVIDUAL REWARD RESPONSIVENESS PREDICTED BY RESTING-STATE CONNECTIVITY OF BASAL GANGLIA AND ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX Nicholas Angelides1, Jayesh Gupta1, Timothy Vickery; 1University of Delaware — Based upon behavioral and psychometric research, a
Behavioral Activation System (BAS) has been proposed to underlie reward
responsiveness and appetitive motivation. However, neural mechanisms
corresponding to the proposed constructs of BAS are still poorly defined.
The basal ganglia (BG) and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) are implicated in
subserving reward-related functions that are also associated with the BAS.
In this study, we examined whether functional connectivity between these
regions predicts a component of dispositional BAS proposed to reflect
reward responsiveness. We employed resting-state functional connectivity
and BAS-reward scores assessed by a personality questionnaire. Participants (N=52) in several different fMRI studies completed a standard resting state run and the Gray’s Behavioral Inhibition and Activation Systems
(BIS/BAS) Questionnaire following their primary tasks. Using resting-state
BOLD, we assessed correlations between anatomically-defined BG ROIs
(caudate and putamen) and bilateral orbitofrontal ROIs. We calculated
mean connectivity between orbitofrontal ROIs and BG ROIs to establish
single subject connectivity summary scores. Correlation analyses showed
that BAS-reward functioning was positively correlated (r=0.28, p<0.04)
with mean functional connectivity scores between BG and middle OFC.
BAS-reward was not correlated with the connectivity scores between BG
and a control region (precentral gyrus, r=0.13, p<0.35), nor was this connectivity associated with a different subscale of the BAS system (BAS-drive,
r=0.03, p<0.83). These results demonstrate a novel correlation between
BAS-reward responsiveness and resting-state connectivity, implying that
spontaneous synchrony between reward-processing regions may play a
role in defining personality characteristics related to motivation.

B33
GENDER-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF EARLY LIFE STRESS ON NEURAL
ASPECTS OF REWARD PROCESSING Sara Bergman1, Maddie Pollack1,
Natalie Colich1, Ian Gotlib1; 1Stanford University — A major risk factor for the

development of reward-related disorders is early life stress (ELS; e.g.,
childhood maltreatment). Previous research indicates that ELS is associated with decreased activation in reward brain regions (e.g., striatum and
insula) during anticipation, and increased activation during reward receipt.
This research has investigated effects of stressful life events many years
after they have occurred; consequently, it is unclear when neural deficits
emerge. Moreover, there is evidence suggesting that ELS has divergent
sex-specific effects on the neurodevelopment of reward function. We measured the effects of ELS on neural responses during the anticipation and
receipt of rewards in children, and we examined whether gender would
interact with ELS. Trained interviewers assessed 58 children so far (ages
10-13 years) for severity of ELS. Participants completed a modified monetary incentive delay task while being scanned with functional magnetic
resonance imaging. ELS severity was entered into higher-level whole-brain
analyses to examine correlations between ELS and neural activity during
anticipation and receipt of reward. Although ELS did not moderate anticipatory activation, ELS severity was positively correlated with activation

2015 Annual Meeting
in right nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and insula during receipt of gains. We
extracted parameter estimates from these regions and obtained a significant
interaction of ELS and gender in NAcc. Whereas females demonstrated
greater activation with increasing ELS during gain > no gain in NAcc,
males showed a negative correlation. Our findings underscore the differential effects of both stress and gender on neural activations during the
different phases of reward processing.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
B34
THE IMPACT OF A MATCH BETWEEN GLOBAL AND LOCAL INCENTIVES ON CATEGORIZATION RULE SWITCHING IN INDIVIDUALS
WITH PARKINSON’S DISEASE AND HEALTHY OLDER ADULTS
Lauren Szymula1, W. Todd Maddox2, Shawn W. Ell1; 1University of Maine, 2University of Texas at Austin — Recent data suggest that performance on rule-based

classification tasks (i.e., tasks that emphasize between-category representations which facilitate the differentiation of members of contrasting categories) can be modulated by manipulating the extent to which global and
local incentives match. This is thought to depend, in part, on increased cognitive flexibility that facilitates categorization rule switching. The present
study investigated whether Parkinson’s disease patients (PDs) and healthy
older adults (OAs) would benefit from a match. Experiment 1 manipulated
global incentive by placing participants in a promotion (gain sensitive)
or prevention (loss sensitive) regulatory focus. The local incentive was to
maximize trial-by-trial gains (i.e., a match with the promotion condition).
Participants were trained on a rule-based task where successful performance required learning a rule on a relevant stimulus dimension while
ignoring irrelevant dimensions. Once a learning criterion was met, the rule
was switched (i.e., a previously irrelevant dimensions became relevant).
Following the rule switch, a match facilitated the performance of OAs, but
had no effect on the performance of PDs. Experiment 2 investigated if this
match benefit for OAs would generalize to a loss-oriented local incentive
that emphasized minimizing trial-by-trial losses (i.e., a match with the prevention condition). In contrast to Experiment 1, a loss-oriented match had
no effect on the performance of OAs. These data suggest that the benefit of
a match between global and local incentives on categorization rule switching may be restricted to gains-oriented situations and may depend on the
frontal-striatal networks disrupted in PD.

B35
VARIABILITY IN TASK CONCEPTUALISATION DRIVES PERFORMANCE-G CORRELATIONS Peter Bright1, Ellen Carroll1,2; 1Anglia Ruskin
University, Cambridge UK, 2University of Cambridge — Research indicates that

the requirement to withhold a prepotent response tendency is a crucial risk
factor for the engagement of Spearman’s g, and that impaired response
inhibition and low fluid intelligence are disproportionately associated
with frontal lobe damage (Bright, 1998). We have shown that recruitment
of g is driven, not so much by task demands per se, but by the modelling
of instructions prior to execution (Duncan et al., 2008; Carroll & Bright,
2013). To further clarify the relative contributions of task conceptualisation
versus real time execution demands to the recruitment of g, participants
undertook a novel speeded response task requiring prepotent response
inhibition (Bright, 1998; Duncan et al., 2008) and the Dot Pattern Expectancy (DPX) task (MacDonald et al., 2005) in which the impact of different
cognitive demands (updating, maintenance, prepared response inhibition)
was explored. Findings showed that performance-g correlations were
strengthened by the presence (vs. absence) of requirements to inhibit prepotent and prepared response tendencies irrespective of overall task difficulty, and by increased maintenance and updating demands on working
memory. Crucially, however, these effects were observed only when the
same body of task instructions was presented as four, and not two, distinct
rules (Carroll & Bright, submitted). Reconceptualisation of task requirements towards greater representational efficiency was also associated with
g. Together, these experiments indicate that recruitment of Spearman’s g is

Poster Session B
largely determined by the relational complexity of task components, and
that the effort required for optimal modelling of a task largely determines
the strength of performance-g correlations.

B36
BENEFITS OF DANCE MOVEMENT TRAINING FOR PEOPLE WITH
PARKINSON’S DISEASE: A PILOT CLINICAL TRIAL Maria I. Ventura1,2,
Jessica M. Ross3, Karen A. Sigvardt2, Elizabeth A. Disbrow4; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University of California, Davis, 3University of California,
Merced, 4Louisiana Stata University, Shreveport — Parkinson’s disease (PD) is
a chronic and progressive neurodegenerative disease which can result in
disruption to a number of motor and cognitive functions. We investigated
the benefits of dance movement training (DMT) on motor and cognitive
functioning and explored how DMT may impact quality of life. Participants
were recruited from PD support groups and Dance for PD®, a DMT program for people with PD. The Intervention group (N=8) completed a battery of neuropsychological testing at time point 1, participated in 10 DMT
intervention sessions (1.25 hours once per week), then completed the same
neuropsychological assessment at time point 2. The Control group (N=7)
completed a battery of tests identical to the one given to the Intervention
group at time points 1 and 2, but did not receive the DMT intervention. After
study completion, Control participants were invited to enroll in Dance for
PD® classes. In the motor domain, the Intervention group experienced a
greater decline in fear of falling (group-by-time interaction, p=.02) and significantly improved gait speed (group-by-time interaction, p=.02) relative
to the Control group. In the cognitive domain, the Intervention group had
significantly faster set-switching completion times (group-by-time interaction, p=.04). In the quality of life domain, the Intervention group reported
significantly greater improvements in quality of life (group-by-time interaction, p=.02) and in activities of daily living (group-by-time interaction,
p=.01). Our findings indicate that DMT interventions like Dance for PD®
can significantly improve motor function, cognitive function and quality of
life for people with PD.

B37
EARLY PRACTICE EFFECTS IN INSTRUCTED TASKS REFLECT
LEARNING OF THE DYNAMIC STRUCTURE OF A TASK Apoorva Bhandari1, Ryan Fugate1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Humans are unique in
that they are able to perform complex tasks with relatively little practice
after being verbally instructed. In previous research, a common finding is
that of an early practice effect wherein the first few trials after instruction
show a rapid decline in response time. As task rules are instructed, such
‘learning curves’ have been interpreted as reflecting a process of transfer
from symbolic to pragmatic rule representations (Ruge & Wolfensteller,
2010). We suggest that the process of implementing novel tasks from
instruction involves not just adopting the rules of the task, but also learning
its dynamic structure. Therefore, early practice effects may reflect adaptation of a rule to the task’s dynamic structure. In two behavioral experiments, we directly tested this idea by examining the transfer of dynamic
structure between tasks. We found that subjects indeed show both positive
(same task structure) and negative (different task structure) transfer of task
dynamic structure, independent of the novelty of task rules. Our results
identify a novel cognitive process that may underlie early practice effects
in instructed tasks.

B38
TASK SWITCHING, INHIBITION, AND ALPHA OSCILLATIONS Russell Costa1, Benjamin Cohen1, Chrono Nu1, Lesa Ellis1; 1Westminster College,
Salt Lake City, UT — Numerous theoretical cognitive models of task switch-

ing propose that inhibition, particularly of recently performed task information, plays a critical role in switching one’s attention between multiple
tasks. At the neural level, recent work in selective attention has examined
the role of alpha-band (8-14 Hz) cortical oscillations as a mechanism for
suppressing goal- or task-irrelevant information. In this study, we explored
whether such alpha-band activity can be extended beyond spatial suppression and selection to examine inhibitory processes involved in switching
attention between non-spatial tasks. Participants switched their attention
between the color, shape, or motion of a series of visual stimuli presented in
the middle of the visual field that contained features of only two (i.e., color

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

69

Poster Session B
and motion, color and shape, or shape and motion) of the three possible
perceptual dimensions. An instructional cue was presented prior to each
target, indicating which feature of the upcoming stimulus the participant
should attend and respond to. Results suggested that increased cue-locked
alpha-band power, observed during the pre-stimulus interval, was associated with task repetition trials compared with task switches. Additionally, during task switch trials, increased alpha-band activity was observed
when the previous (n-1) trial’s goal-relevant information was presented
as distracting information on the current trial. These results support the
notion that alpha-band activity may underlie inhibitory processes involved
in task switching beyond spatial tasks; moreover, such activity may play a
role in both pre-stimulus, proactive cognitive control as well as in stimulus-driven, reactive suppression of task-irrelevant perceptual information.

B39
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF SWITCHING BETWEEN PROCEDURAL
AND DECLARATIVE CATEGORIZATION Matthew Crossley1, Benjamin
Turner2, F. Gregory Ashby2; 1UC Berkeley, 2UC Santa Barbara — A number of
current theories assume that human category learning is governed by the
interaction of multiple qualitatively distinct systems. A popular assumption is that these hypothesized category-learning systems map onto
broadly defined memory systems. In this view, procedural memory is used
to form many-to-one stimulus to response mappings (i.e., S-R associations),
whereas declarative memory is used to apply explicit rules and test hypotheses about category membership. The multiple systems framework has
been successful in motivating and accounting for a broad array of empirical
observations over the last 20 years. Even so, little is known about how these
systems interact to coordinate control of limited motor resources. Here, we
report neuroimaging results suggesting that the brain networks recruited
by rapid trial-by-trial switching between procedural and declarative categorization tasks include and extend those found in classical task switching brain networks. In particular, by comparing activity on trials within
a particular system based on the type of the preceding trial—for instance,
whether a trial designed to be solved procedurally (indicated to the participant by means of a cue) was preceded by another procedural trial (a “stay”
trial) or a declarative trial (a “switch” trial)—we identified several areas in
prefrontal and inferior temporal cortex whose activity was reliably different across trial types. We propose that these regions comprise a network
whose activity is critically involved in initiating the switch between systems—a result which has implications for both the category learning and
task-switching literatures.

B40
EFFECTS OF TRIAL PREPARATION TIME AND TRIAL TYPE PROBABILITY ON PERFORMANCE OF ANTISACCADES AND PROSACCADES Jordan Pierce1, Jennifer McDowell1; 1University of Georgia — In saccade

tasks, individuals must make a rapid eye movement towards (prosaccade,
PS) or away from (antisaccade, AS) a peripheral target. When these saccade
types are intermixed in a single run, cues are provided to indicate to the
participant which task to perform on the subsequent trial. The probability
of a certain trial type occurring within a run, time between trials, and duration of the cue may all impact the participant’s ability to prepare for the
trial and, thus, the saccade reaction time (RT) and number of errors committed. In the current study, 111 participants performed 5 runs of mixed
trials with 10, 25, 50, 75, or 90% probability of an AS (vs. PS). Participants
were assigned to one of four timing conditions with a long vs. short intertrial interval and long vs. short trial type cue. Results for RTs showed that
when the cue period was short, RTs increased for both saccade types when
the probability of that trial type occurring was low. For the long cue conditions, the 50% AS run had the longest RTs for both AS and PS. Results for
error rate also indicated an effect of trial type cue, with short cue conditions
eliciting nearly twice as many AS errors as long cue. These findings indicate
that in the context of mixed saccade trials with varying probability of AS,
performance is more strongly influenced by the amount of time to prepare
for the specific saccade type than by the amount of time between trials.

70

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

B41
MINDFULNESS TRAINING IMPROVES ATTENTIONAL PERFORMANCE IN ELITE COLLEGE ATHLETES Joshua Rooks1, Alexandra Morrison1, Merissa Goolsarran1, Scott Rogers1, Amishi Jha1; 1University of Miami —
Elite athletes strive for peak performance. Yet the stress and anxiety of high
stakes, high demand athletic training may impede performance. We investigated the impact of offering mental conditioning programs to a Division
I NCAA football team (N=105). Performance on the sustained attention
response task (SART), self-reported stress (PSS) and anxiety (STAI) were
examined before (T1) and after (T2) the mental conditioning programs.
Over 4 weeks, the team attended a mindfulness training course (MT) or
a relaxation and visualization course (RV). Both courses involved 4, 45
minute group sessions with a trainer, 4 weekly proctored practice sessions,
and 12 minutes of assigned daily homework listening to guided recordings.
Assignment to MT vs. RV was determined via a matched randomization
procedure. Because homework compliance was highly variable, each training group was median split by self-reported minutes of homework practice.
A repeated measures ANOVA examining time (T1 vs. T2) x training type
(MT vs. RV) x homework compliance (high vs. low) on SART performance
(A’) demonstrated a significant 3-way interaction. At T2, A’ was greater for
high vs. low MT, while high and low RV did not differ from each other.
High MT also outperformed RV at T2. When practice time was considered
as a continuous variable, greater time spent engaging in homework corresponded with greater improvements in A’, as well as greater reductions
in self-reported stress and anxiety for MT but not RV. Thus, MT course
participation and better homework compliance enhanced attention and
psychological health.

B42
PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND UNCERTAINTY DURING SEQUENTIAL
TASKS Theresa M. Desrochers1, Anne GE. Collins1, David Badre1; 1Brown University — Every day we perform sequences of tasks that require monitoring the

performance of individual sub-goals to reach a final end goal. This process
often occurs in the absence of external cues indicating the amount of progress made towards the overarching goal. In such situations, one must internally monitor progress through the sequence. In previous fMRI and TMS
experiments, we found that activation in the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex
(RLPFC) progressively increased its activity over the course of a sequence
of tasks. Specifically, participants repeatedly performed a sequence of four
simple categorization tasks (e.g.: color, shape, shape, color). Further, single
pulse TMS delivered to the RLPFC during the task sequences increasingly
disrupted performance as the sequence progressed, mirroring the activation pattern. These results suggested that RLPFC may be necessary to
resolve accumulated uncertainty at each position in the sequence, rather
than representing serial position itself. We designed an experiment to
explicitly test this hypothesis by breaking the confound between uncertainty and sequence position. Specifically, we provided “clues” to the
participants as to the identity of the task they should be performing on
approximately one third of the trials across positions. The clues serve to
reduce the uncertainty on those trials. We used computational modeling
to infer from subjects’ trial-by-trial choices their uncertainty about the task
sequence. Preliminary results from fMRI participants suggest that RLPFC
preferentially represents this uncertainty instead of a signal that simply
monotonically increases through each position in sequence.

B43
NEURAL EVIDENCE FOR STIMULUS AND RESPONSE-SPECIFIC
TASK PREPARATION Savannah Cookson1, Richard Hazeltine2, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2University of Iowa — Cognitive control refers to the set of processes by which we direct our actions toward a
specific goal based on present situational context. One of these processes
includes our ability to use incomplete information to aid performance in
an upcoming task; this process allows us to narrow our future actions to a
subset of options, reducing selection and/or preparation time. However,
it is unclear how these processes are instantiated at the neural level. Here,
we used an event-related fMRI design to understand the activation patterns that were elicited by a partial-information cue indicating either the
upcoming stimulus type (face/place) or response hand (left/right). Stimulus-response (S-R) mappings segregated stimulus types by response hand,

2015 Annual Meeting
such that the two dimensions were perfectly confounded. We hypothesized
that cues would allow for the activation of coherent subsets of S-R pairs
via sensorimotor region biasing; thus, in addition to the activation of general control-related processing areas, we expected cues to activate both the
explicitly related sensorimotor processing regions and those implied by
the overlap in the mapping structure. Whole-brain analyses of cued versus
uncued trials at the cue event showed significant activation in frontoparietal regions for cued versus uncued trials at the cue. In addition, both stimulus- and response-related regions showed separable activation for both
types of cues in a regions-of-interest analysis. These results suggest that,
when a salient S-R subgroup is indicated by a cue, control processes bias
activation in both stimulus- and response-relevant regions in preparation
for future response selection and execution.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
B44
WHITE MATTER DIFFERENCES IN MONOLINGUAL AND BILINGUAL YOUNG ADULTS Ashley Chung-Fat-Yim1, Laura Mesite2, Buddhika
Bellana3,4, Gigi Luk2, Ellen Bialystok1,4; 1York University, 2Harvard Graduate
School of Education, 3University of Toronto, 4Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest
Centre for Geriatric Care — Previous research has reported behavioral differ-

ences between monolingual and bilingual participants in executive control
but the brain structures underlying those differences are largely unknown.
We compared fractional anisotropy (FA) of young adults who were unbalanced but proficient bilinguals and monolinguals who had minimal use of
a second language. Participants performed a verbal and nonverbal switching task in fMRI and we used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to measure
white matter integrity. Fourteen monolingual and 17 English-French bilingual young adults participated. Groups differed in French proficiency,
(Bilingual = 90.2%, Monolingual = 19.8%, t = 18.72, p < .001) and French
usage (Bilingual = 30.9%, Monolingual= 0.40%, t = 6.69, p < .001). Behavioral results showed equivalent group performance on the nonverbal task
but slower performance by bilinguals in the verbal task, consistent with
previous research. Analysis of DTI data showed that bilinguals had higher
FA than monolinguals in association tracts in the left hemisphere, specifically in superior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior longitudinal fasciculus
and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (corrected p < .05). No area showed
higher FA in monolinguals than bilinguals. The higher FA values for bilinguals in these regions are similar to those found in a study with older adults
(Luk et al., 2011) and with a meta-analysis of functional activity during language switching in which bilinguals showed significant activation in these
left temporal and parietal regions across studies (Luk et al., 2012). These
results contribute to our understanding of the brain basis of performance
differences shown between monolinguals and bilinguals.

B45
THE INFLUENCE OF PREVIOUS CONCUSSIONS ON RETURN-TOPLAY RECOVERY TIME Brian R. Johnson1, Christopher D’Lauro1, Craig A.
Foster1, Marie Rossillon1, Michelle Ferguson1, Gavin O’Neil1, Jonathan Jackson1,
C. Dain Allred1, Gerald McGinty1, Darren Campbell1; 1U.S. Air Force Academy —
Concussions have long been treated as an ephemeral injury leaving no lasting damage; however, recent evidence indicates neural effects may persist
even after cognitive function has apparently returned to normal. At the Air
Force Academy, cadets must complete required military training and sport
participation that increases their susceptibility to concussions. Military
command structure and free inclusive healthcare afford more complete
concussion follow-up for return-to-play protocols than at civilian schools.
Our goal is to use our integrated concussion care and high-risk population
to better understand how prior concussion history effects return-to-play
determinations. We have collected a two-year comprehensive database
(N=307) cataloguing these assessments including: days until normalized
neurocognitive assessment, source of concussion, prior concussion history,
days until symptom free, days until completed return-to-play protocol, and
others. These data indicate dramatically longer recovery times for anyone
with a prior concussion history when compared to those experiencing
their first concussion. For example, first time concussion sufferers reported
being symptom free in a shorter time (M=28.0 days) than those with a previous concussion history (M=74.3 days; F(1, 75)=5.90, p < .05). When taking

Poster Session B
a neurocognitive battery (e.g., Stroop task, visual search task, working
memory, etc.), first time concussion sufferers returned to their baseline earlier (M=25.2 days) than those with a previous concussion history (M = 53.0
days; F(1, 75)=4.67, p < .05). Taken together, these data support the idea that
concussions cause latent neural damage that persist even with apparently
normal cognitive performance.

B46
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF JUDGMENTS OF LEARNING Andre Lindsey1, Pradeep Ramanathan1, Katie Bessette2, Michael Stevens2; 1The University of Connecticut, 2The Institute of Living Hartford Hospital — A key type of
meta-memory, judgment of learning (JOL), is an individual’s evaluation of
the extent to which information has been learned. JOLs frequently take the
form of Likert scale ratings of the likelihood that currently or recently studied information will be successfully recalled at a later time. The few extant
neuroimaging studies have employed visual images of faces and scenes,
rather than the traditional word pair learning task used in behavioral studies. Furthermore, these studies have not investigated the neural underpinnings of the well-documented “delayed JOL effect”, the finding that JOLs
made after a short delay (e.g., 2 minutes) are far more accurate than those
made immediately after study. Here we used event-related fMRI to test the
hypothesis that JOLs made immediately after stimulus encoding involve
primarily fronto-executive networks subserving inferential processes,
while those solicited after a delay will also include medial temporal networks reflecting the additional recruitment of long term recall processes.
In this study, eighteen participants studied unrelated word pairs and made
immediate and delayed JOLs. Distinct but overlapping regions of activation
were observed, with immediate JOLs associated with differentially greater
activation of fronto-executive networks and delayed JOLs associated with
differentially greater activation of medial temporal networks. These results
suggest that when JOLs are made immediately after encoding vs. after a
delay of several minutes, distinct cognitive processes are engaged. Cognitive processing models of JOLs must therefore take into account the elapsed
time between encoding and judgment.

B47
DOES CORTISOL IMPAIR CONTROLLED COGNITIVE PROCESSING
DURING ACUTE STRESS? A META-ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTS
OF CORTISOL ADMINISTRATION ON EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND
CONTROLLED ATTENTION. Grant S. Shields1, Joseph C. Bonner1, Wesley
G. Moons1; 1University of California, Davis — The hormone cortisol is often
believed to play a pivotal role in mediating the effects of stress on human
cognition. This meta-analysis is an attempt to determine the effects of cortisol administration on controlled cognitive processes, namely, executive
function and selective attention. We hypothesized that cortisol administration would produce significant impairments in executive function and
controlled attention. Surprisingly, however, the results contradicted our
hypothesis: the effect of cortisol administration on executive function and
controlled attention was negligible, g=0.03, t(24.3)=0.77, p=.45, 95% CI
[-0.051, 0.112]. Fine-grained analyses revealed that, after separating the
rapid, nongenomic effects of cortisol from the slow, genomic effects of cortisol, the rapid effects of cortisol significantly enhanced response inhibition
but impaired working memory. However, while these effects paralleled
the effects of stress on the same cognitive processes, the effects of cortisol
on both response inhibition and working memory were much smaller in
magnitude than the effects of stress, suggesting that cortisol is not wholly
responsible for the effects of stress on those cognitive processes. Thus, we
found little support for the idea that increases in cortisol is the primary
pathway through which acute stress impairs executive function and alters
selective attention.

B48
A COMPARISON OF TRADITIONAL AND TABLET-DELIVERED
TRAILS A&B IN THREE SAMPLES Sean Mullen1, Tiffany Bullard1, Jason
Cohen1, Daniel Palac1, Andrew Hua1, Aaron Johnson1, Raksha Mudar1; 1University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — There are many advantages to adopting

mobile, digital cognitive assessments—for research purposes, clinical practice, and personal use—provided that they are accurate, valid, sensitive to
change, and easy-to-use. Paper-based Trails A&B (TrAB) has been used as

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

71

Poster Session B
a global measure of executive functioning for decades, but it is susceptible
to methodological effects and is cumbersome to administer. The purpose
of this study was to examine initial evidence for the usability and validity
of multiple iPad versions of TrAB. Participants were recruited from Central Illinois from three, independent randomized controlled trials. Sample 1
(n=14) involved young adults, sample 2 (n=12) involved middle-aged adults
with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and sample 3 involved older adults
(n=6) without depression or MCI. As part of a large assessment battery,
participants received paper and iPad TrAB, in randomly counter-balanced
order, as well as biometric (e.g., blood pressure [BP]), neuropsychological,
psychosocial, and physical functional assessments. Results indicated significant (p < .01) positive correlations between TrA reaction time [RT] (r =
.794) and TrB RT (r = .594) which attenuated slightly after accounting for
age. The correlation between cost measures (TrB-TrA RT) was not significant (p = .51). Better performance via a new cost algorithm (based on the
difference between novel iPad-delivered TrAB moving modes and original
stationary modes) was associated with lower BP (r = -.375). Discussion will
highlight differences between the modes of delivery, advantages and disadvantages of iPad data collection, as well as age-related challenges. Future
directions for the utility of iPad-delivery will also be discussed.

B49
NETWORK PROPERTIES ASSOCIATED WITH TASK-BASED
CHANGES IN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Caterina Gratton1, Timothy O. Laumann1, Evan M. Gordon1, Babatunde Adeyemo1, Steven E. Petersen1;
1
Washington University in St Louis — Recent studies suggest that resting func-

tional connectivity (FC) of large-scale networks is altered when completing
a variety of tasks. However, it is less clear which areas exhibit these alterations. We propose two hypotheses regarding how FC may change during a
task: (1) FC will change for regions activated by a task or (2) FC will change
at hub regions that interact with many networks (measured with participation coefficient, PC). Here, we analyzed fMRI FC from 29 participants
during rest and three visual tasks varying substantially in their processing
and control demands: a semantic task, a mental rotation task, and a coherence discrimination task. Task-residuals from a mixed block/event-related
(FIR) GLM model were used for FC analysis to minimize the influences
of frank task-evoked signals. FC was analyzed by taking time-series correlations between 264 predefined gray-matter regions. Although largely
similar, FC during tasks and rest varied systematically and consistently
across individuals. Visual regions decreased FC within their own network,
but increased FC with subsets of control regions. Changes in connectivity,
especially between networks, were positively correlated with the activation
of regions during tasks and with the PC of regions at rest. These effects
were independent, and regions that consistently showed both high PC
and activation localized to control networks. These findings suggest that
task-activation and network hub characteristics separately predict which
regions change their FC in a task and may shed light on how processing
and control locations are flexibly coordinated in the service of a variety of
complex goals.

B50
‘FROM STARTUP-TO-CEO:’ GUIDED EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING OF
GOAL-ORIENTED ATTENTION REGULATION THROUGH GAME-ASSISTED TRAINING FOLLOWING BRAIN INJURY. Fred Loya1,2,3, Deborah Binder1,2,3, Nicholas Rodriguez1,2,3, Michelle Madore4, Bruce Buchanan3,
Audrey Kossman1,2, Michael Sapiro1,2, Tatjana Novakovic-Agopian1,2,3, Anthony
J.-W Chen1,2,3; 1VA Northern California Health Care System, 2San Francisco VA
Medical Center, 3University of California, Berkeley and San Francisco, 4Palo Alto
VA Health Care System — Attentional control processes are amongst the most
commonly disrupted cognitive functions following brain injury. Improved
training methods and tools that support the systematic and intensive
strengthening of these ‘gateway’ functions would be highly valuable for
clinical rehabilitation and neuroscience. We designed and developed a
training system that consists of interactive ‘game’ scenarios that unfold in
a narrative arc (starting and building a multi-component service business),
integrated into a trainer-led coaching protocol, with goals of (a) promoting
experiential learning of attention regulation skills by providing opportunities for skill application across a range of calibrated cognitive contexts
requiring goal-directed functional cognition, and (b) enhancing general-

72

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
ization by fostering the application of skills learned in the ‘game-world’
to personal life goals. We assessed the process and effects of training for
six participants with history of TBI (> 6 months post-injury) and chronic
mild-to-moderate executive dysfunction who completed 7 individual training sessions in-person or by tele-video and approximately 30 minutes of
daily practice over 6-8 weeks. Participants reported increasing success with
applying skills and strategies in both ‘game’ and personal contexts over
the course of training, and self-perceived improvements in cognitive abilities after training. Quantitative changes in neuropsychological test performance were observed. These findings suggest that a training system that
incorporates game experiences can provide valuable opportunities for the
guided experiential learning of attention regulation skills that will be applicable in personal life. This training system may provide a valuable method
for studying neural mechanisms of improvements in cognitive functioning.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
B51
EVIDENCE OF A DISSOCIATION IN ERP REPETITION PRIMING
EFFECTS BETWEEN DEAF SIGNERS Katherine J. Midgley1, Phillip J. Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2, Karen Emmorey1; 1San Diego State University, 2CNRS
& Université de Provence — Numerous studies demonstrate an attenuation of

the N400 component to a meaningful stimulus that is repeated compared to
when it is presented for the first time. For words this effect is interpreted as
reflecting the decreased difficulty associated with integrating lexico-semantic representations (smaller N400s reflecting easier integration). We report a
study with two groups of participants who viewed a series of ASL signs in
a repetition priming paradigm. Sixteen ASL deaf signers performed a go/
no-go semantic categorization task (press to occasional signs for people,
e.g., policeman) to 200 video clips of ASL signs. Fifty items were repeated
on the next trial. Sixteen non-signing hearing participants also viewed
the same stimuli, but because they did not know the meaning of the ASL
signs their task was to press to occasional signs that contained a dot superimposed at different locations near the face of the signer. The ERP data
revealed a significant attenuation of the N400 component (350-600 ms) for
repeated compared to unrepeated signs in the deaf group. This N400 effect
had the typical central-parietal distribution and a very similar time course
to that seen in previous studies using words from spoken languages. The
hearing participants revealed a very different pattern -- instead of an attenuation of the N400, they showed a significant increase in negativity in the
N400 latency range for repeated compared to unrelated signs. This is first
study to show this pattern, which suggests that repeated items are unexpected for non-signers but are more easily recognized for signers.

B52
MORPHEME-BASED COMBINATORIAL PROCESSING OF
ENGLISH COMPOUNDS: EVIDENCE FROM MAGNETOENCEPHALOGRAPHY AND LEXICAL DECISION Robert Fiorentino1, Stephen
Politzer-Ahles2, Ke Liao3; 1University of Kansas, 2New York University, Abu Dhabi,
University of Kansas Medical Center — The extent to which the processing

3

of complex words such as compounds (e.g., teacup) makes recourse to
morpheme representations (e.g., tea/cup) remains a matter of debate. One
factor argued under some models to preclude morpheme-based processing
is limited semantic transparency. The current study (N=20) thus examines
the processing of semantically transparent and opaque compounds using
magnetoencephalography (MEG) and lexical decision, testing transparent
compounds (e.g., shoebox), opaque compounds (e.g., honeymoon), monomorphemic words with a word-initial pseudomorpheme (e.g., stampede),
and monomorphemic words with a word-final pseudomorpheme (e.g.,
crimson), matched on a number of lexical properties. If both transparent
and opaque compounds are processed via morphemes, we predict faster
response times (RT) for compounds than monomorphemic words; if transparency affects but does not preclude morpheme-based processing, we also
predict faster RT for transparent than opaque compounds. Using MEG, we
probe for effects that distinguish transparent and opaque compounds from
monomorphemic words, and effects distinguishing the transparent and
opaque compounds. RTs were faster for both transparent and opaque compounds compared to their monomorphemic counterparts, and for transparent than opaque compounds. False Discovery Rate corrected MEG source

2015 Annual Meeting
waveform analysis revealed emerging effects distinguishing transparent
and opaque compounds from their monomorphemic counterparts; these
responses emerged on similar timecourses for transparent and opaque
compounds and were evident across left entorhinal, fusiform, and inferior
temporal cortex from approximately 280-450ms post-stimulus onset. A
right-hemisphere entorhinal effect distinguished transparent and opaque
compounds at approximately 375-460ms. These findings are consistent
with word recognition models positing across-the-board morpheme-based
processing of complex words.

B53
LANGUAGE AND SPEECH-MOTOR REPRESENTATIONS IN THE
HEALTHY ADULT LEFT HEMISPHERE: A NAVIGATED TMS - VOICE
REACTION TIME ANALYSIS Noriko Tanigawa1, Theresa Hauck2, Florian
Ringel2, Bernhard Meyer2, Sandro M. Krieg2; 1University of Oxford, 2Technical
University of Munich — The present study investigated spatial distributions

of language and speech-motor representations in the healthy adults’ left
hemisphere (LH) by analyzing the variations in object naming voice reaction times (vRTs) caused by navigated TMS. Nine right-handed native
German speakers were asked to name 100 familiar objects. For each trial, a
5-Hz 10-pulse train started at the picture presentation onset and vRT was
measured from the onset of the first pulse to the onset of the first phoneme
of the object name. At each of the 46 stimulation sites pre-defined along the
gyri in LH, three trials were given. vRTs were percentile-ranked. The stimulation sites that received the longest 25% vRTs 2 out of 3 times for 4 out
of 9 participants were designated disrupted sites. When only 22 sites along
the core language pathways (IFG, STG, MTG, SMG, AnG) were included,
two disrupted sites emerged in mMTG and opIFG, implicated in semantic
retrieval and speech planning respectively. When all 46 sites were included,
opIFG dropped and 3 disrupted sites emerged, presumably at the origins
of the corticospinal tract for articulatory control (dorsal premotor/PrG)
and of the corticobulbar tract for respiratory regulation (ventral premotor/
PrG). For 3 of the 9 participants, a set of disrupted sites emerged in SFG
and opIFG, presumably associated with the frontal aslant tract for verbal
fluency. The vRT analysis showed that delayed responses may reflect systematic disruptions of 5 different sources, with nTMS impact greater on
speech-motor control pathways and semantic retrieval area than on speech
planning area.

B54
LOOK HERE: AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL (ERP)
INVESTIGATION OF THE OPTIMAL VIEWING POSITION (OVP)
IN WORD RECOGNITION Wen-Hsuan Chan1, Thomas P. Urbach1, Marta
Kutas1,2; 1University of California, Cognitive Science, San Diego, 2University of
California, Neurosciences, San Diego — Visual word recognition strongly

depends on where in a word the eye fixates. Isolated word recognition is
fastest and most accurate when the eye fixates the word left of center; this is
known as the optimal viewing position, OVP, which is commonly assumed
to be a word phenomenon. We investigated the effect of fixation position
on word processing by recording event related brain potentials (ERPs) to
letter strings (words and nonwords) of varying lengths presented either
centered at fixation or at the OVP. The frequency distribution over our
word stimuli was matched to the CELEX English corpus. Occipital P100
amplitudes were larger for longer than shorter words and for longer than
shorter nonwords, regardless of fixation condition. By contrast, there was a
reliable effect of fixation at the right occipital site but for words only: P100
amplitudes were smaller for words positioned at the OVP than positioned
at the word’s center. This difference was not seen for nonwords! Moreover,
this early sensory processing -- P100 amplitude -- difference between the
two fixation positions for words was correlated with word length, suggesting a role for early perceptual processing (~ 100 ms) in the OVP. However,
the finding that the fixation point differences are observed for words only
indicates that the OVP effect cannot be explained by a single visual perceptual mechanism that does not take language into account.

Poster Session B

B55
FAST LMTG ACTIVATION (AT AROUND 100MS) REFLECTS RAPID
LEXICAL-SEMANTIC ACCESS DURING READING Jian Huang1,2, Suiping Wang1, Hsuan-Chih Chen2; 1South China Normal University, 2Chinese University of Hong Kong — Lexical-semantic access is one of the core components

of reading comprehension. Evidence from fMRI studies on patients and
normal adults has consistently shown that lexical access is related to the
left middle temporal gyrus (LMTG), but it is still unclear when this process
occurs. Most ERP studies show that lexical-semantic access occurs in the
N400 time window (300-500 ms post-stimulus onset), but behavioral and
eye movement studies provide evidence that it can occur within 250 ms.
Given this controversy, we traced the time course of the LMTG activation to
verify the time point of lexical-semantic access by using the Event-Related
Optical Signal (EROS) technique with both high spatial and temporal resolution. In Experiment 1, prime-target pairs were presented for lexical decision on the target noun, which was either semantically related or unrelated
to the prime. The unrelated targets increased the activation in the LMTG
from 128 mspost-stimulus onset. In Experiment 2, verb-noun phrases were
presented for lexical decision on the final noun, which was either semantically congruent or incongruent with the verb. The incongruent targets
enhanced the activation in the LMTG from 128 ms post-stimulus onset.
In Experiment 3, sentences with high-or low-constraint context were presented for semantic plausibility judgment. The final target nouns following
the low-constraint context increased the activation in the LMTG from 98
ms post-stimulus onset. These highly consistent results across experiments
using words, phrases, or sentences as stimuli, clearly suggest that lexical-semantic access can occur very rapidly during reading comprehension.

B57
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF TOP-DOWN CONTROL IN VISUAL WORD
RECOGNITION Caroline Whiting1, Elisabeth Fonteneau1, William Marslen-Wilson1; 1University of Cambridge — Behavioral and neuroimaging evidence suggests that an early stage in visual word recognition is the strictly bottom-up
segmentation of the visual input into candidate linguistic substrings (words
and morphemes), where this process is blind to the lexical properties of the
strings being generated. The goal of this study, using combined electroand magneto-encephalography (EMEG), was to investigate whether these
early segmentation processes could be modulated by top-down semantic
constraints. Participants saw morphologically complex and simple English
words preceded by a semantically related or unrelated word, with no
associated response task. We asked whether these contextual semantic
constraints would modulate the initial interpretation of a letter-string as
containing a root and suffix (e.g. farm-er), and in particular, affect incorrect bottom-up segmentations (e.g. corner as corn + -er), contrasting these
complex (farmer) and pseudo-complex (corner) strings with morphologically simple forms (pebble). Source analyses of the EMEG data, using L2
minimum norm estimates (MNE), showed no priming effects in the earliest
stages of visual word recognition (up to 250 ms post-onset), and no effects
in posterior occipito-temporal sites. Significant semantic priming was seen
from 250-500 ms in left anterior temporal and fusiform regions, showing
decreased activity when targets were preceded by a semantically-related
word. These late effects, in brain regions associated with access to lexical
representations, showed spatially distinct patterns for complex and pseudo-complex targets. The overall spatiotemporal distribution of top-down
effects is consistent with a strong morpho-orthographic account of the neurobiological substrate for visual word recognition.

LANGUAGE: Other
B58
MEASURING MUSICAL AND LINGUISTIC PREDICTION IN COMPARABLE WAYS Allison Fogel1, Gina Kuperberg1,2, Jason Rosenberg3, Dillon
Bowen1, Martin Rohrmeier4, Aniruddh Patel1; 1Tufts University, 2MGH/HST Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 3Yale-NUS College, 4Technische Universität Dresden — Music, like language, involves complex hierarchical structures and predictive listening (perceivers actively and implicitly
predict upcoming information). Also similar to language, predictions are
based on the interaction of different sources of information present in the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

73

Poster Session B
sequence. As a first step in studying relations between predictive mechanisms in music and language, we have developed a musical version of the
well-known linguistic cloze probability task, in which listeners are asked to
complete a sentence fragment with the first word that comes to mind. Listeners were presented with the beginning of tonal melodies and were asked
to sing the note they expected to continue the melody. Half of the melodies
had an underlying harmonic structure designed to constrain expectations
for the next note. Each such ‘high constraint’ (HC) melody was matched to
a ‘low constraint’ (LC) melody matched in terms of rhythm and melodic
contour, but differing in harmonic structure. Data from 44 participants
revealed much greater consistency in the notes sung following HC vs. LC
melodies, as predicted. Human performance was compared to that of a
n-gram model based on statistical learning of melodic structure. The model
successfully predicted participants’ responses for LC melodies but not HC
melodies. This suggests that prediction of pitch information in music is
more complex than can be captured with simple statistical learning model,
and involves the interplay of at least two different levels of structure: a
‘surface’ level (sequences of scale degrees and durations) and an ‘abstract’
level (underlying harmonic structure).

B59
VISUAL FEATURE PROCESSING DURING WORD RECOGNITION:
A MASKED ERP STUDY He Pu1, Katherine J. Midgley2, Phillip J. Holcomb1,2,
Jonathan Grainger3; 1Tufts University, 2San Diego State University, 3CNRS and
Aix-Marseille University — According to the Bi-Modal Interactive Activation

Model (BIAM) of word processing, brain areas that are responsible for early
visual feature processing should be specialized for the rapid mapping of
the primitive components of letters onto higher level whole letter representations. Support for this prediction comes from studies that have reported
effects of visual similarity between prime and target letters during masked
letter priming. While previous studies have manipulated some aspects of
similarity between prime and target words (e.g., font), the present study is
the first to manipulate the similarity of the constituent letter features within
words in order to test whether the early feature mapping found during
letter perception also occurs during word recognition. Fifty-six Native
English speakers completed a no/no-go semantic categorization task in a
masked repetition priming ERP paradigm. We manipulated letter shape
similarity across 5-letter prime-target pairs based on results from a previous norming study. Similar pairs shared visual features across lower and
upper case (e.g. cusp – CUSP) while dissimilar pairs had low visual feature
overlap across lower and upper case (e.g. bald – BALD). We found a significant repetition effect on the N/P150 for visually similar prime-target pairs
while visually dissimilar prime-target pairs did not reveal any evidence of
an N/P150 effect. These findings support one prediction from the BIAM
which specifies an early interactivity in the brain system responsible for fast
bottom up feature processing during word recognition.

B60
LANGUAGE LATERALIZATION OF BIMODAL BILINGUALS: A
FUNCTIONAL TRANSCRANIAL DOPPLER SONOGRAPHY (FTCD)
STUDY OF SPEECH AND SIGN PRODUCTION. Eva Gutierrez-Sigut1,
Richard Daws1, Heather Payne1, Chloe Marshall1, Mairead MacSweeney1; 1University College London — We investigate how bimodal bilingualism influences responses on fluency tasks, in particular how knowing a sign language might affect brain lateralization patterns during word generation.
Although fMRI studies show that signed languages are processed in similar
neural regions as spoken languages (MacSweeney et al., 2008) behavioural
(Marshall et al., 2013) and ERP studies (Gutierrez et al., 2012) suggest that
lexical access during sign language processing may be more influenced
by the interplay between semantics and phonology, than during spoken
language. We use Functional transcranial Doppler sonography (fTCD), a
noninvasive way to measure cerebral blood flow, to investigate lateralization during British Sign Language (BSL) and speech production. We examine phonological and semantic production in hearing adult BSL/ English
bilinguals (Children Of Deaf Adults: CODAs) in both languages. Results
showed that participants were predominantly left lateralized for English
(84%) and BSL (97%) production. There were no differences in strength
of lateralization between phonological and semantic tasks in any of the
languages. However, participants exhibited a stronger pattern of lateralization during the BSL task than during English generation. This result is

74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
consistent with our recently collected data which suggest stronger lateralization during sign generation in native deaf signers than during English
generation in hearing non signers. This pattern, alongside the current
results, implies that differences in lateralization between BSL and English
are driven by language modality rather than by deafness itself. We discuss
whether this effect is due exclusively to the higher motoric demands of sign
production in comparison with speech production.

B61
THE PERCEPTUAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONSONANT VOICING AND VOWEL PITCH Sara Catlin1, Marie Huffman1, Ellen Broselow1, John
Drury1; 1Stony Brook University — Pitch skip is a cross-linguistic phenomenon

in which vowel pitch after a voiced obstruent starts low and rises, while
vowel pitch after a voiceless obstruent starts high and falls. In English (and
other languages) this voicing-pitch association is active both in production
(Hombert 1978; Kingston 2004; Hanson 2009) and in perception (Abramson
& Lisker 1984; Whalen et al. 1992), and listeners use pitch skip to identify
obstruent voicing with ambiguous voice onset time (VOT). However, the
nature of the (neural) mechanisms underlying this vowel-pitch/consonant-voicing connection is unknown. For example, it is unclear whether
this plays a functional role in early/pre-attentive auditory processing, or
only later (i.e., in a possibly higher-level post-perceptual/attention-regulated way). We used event-related potentials (ERPs) in an attended oddball paradigm manipulating obstruent-voicing (pa/ba) and vowel-pitch
(High/Low) yielding four types of rarely occurring deviants (pa-H/pa-L/
ba-H/ba-L) which were tested in four separate blocks. Standard stimuli
contrasted in voicing with all deviants, but realized an intermediate/midrange (M) vowel pitch between the H/L values of the deviants (i.e., paM/
baM). ERP results showed: (i) a mismatch-negativity (MMN) for both types
of consonants, but larger for voiced deviants, (ii) N2b effects for both types
of consonants, but larger for voiceless, and (iii) a P300 voicing/pitch interaction due to the fact that the voiced/low-pitch deviant demonstrated a
smaller amplitude than the other three conditions. That a voicing/pitch
interaction emerged only in the later (P300) but not the earlier (MMN/N2b)
measures is consistent with a post-perceptual/attention-regulated locus for
the relationship between these features in auditory processing.

B62
WHY DOESN’T NEGATIVE LANGUAGE BEHAVE? INFERENCES
FROM EMOTIONAL LANGUAGE Adriana Ariza1, Connie Shears1, Maisy
Lam1, Amy Cohen1, Melissa Bond1, Mackenzie Smith1, Erika Sam1, Jay Kim1;
Chapman University — Emotional language appears to support the inference

1

process in a hierarchical nature (Shears, et al., 2011). However, Nasrallah,
Carmel and Lavie (2009) suggest that the negative valence should be primary in supporting inferences because it is survival based. Further, Gygax,
Garnham and Oakhill (2004) claim the importance of context is critical
when readers are processing emotional language. Here, we extend previous findings using two sentence pairs, by examining longer, more natural
story contexts. Similarly, we hypothesized that if emotional language supports the formation of causal inferences, then positive stories should cause
more false alarms to inference-related target words than negative stories.
Participants made key press responses to words either in the story (control)
or words related to the inferred information (experiment). Both accuracy
and reaction time data were used to measure the formation of inferences
across valences. Results suggest readers formed inferences equally from
positive and neutral stories, but did not form inferences from negative emotional stories. These findings imply a unique quality of negative emotional
language that resists typical comprehension processes of knowledge-based
inferences.

B63
THE NEURAL NETWORK OF READING: SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN READING NETWORKS IDENTIFIED VIA
TASK-BASED FMRI AND RESTING-STATE FMRI Gali Ellenblum1,
Jeremy J. Purcell1, Brenda Rapp1; 1Johns Hopkins University — Resting-State

functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (RS-fMRI) allows acquisition of
fMRI data without task performance during scanning. RS-fMRI provides
certain advantages relative to task-based fMRI, including easier and faster
data acquisition, reduction of task-irrelevant differences between groups

2015 Annual Meeting
(e.g., differences related to effort, error, etc.), and use with individuals who
cannot perform certain tasks (e.g., because of paralysis). However, the
correspondence between RS and task-based fMRI networks has not been
well-established in many cognitive domains. In reading, the limited available research lacks statistical rigor, and has suffered methodological shortcomings. We examined 11 healthy adults during rest (RS-fMRI) and during
reading (task-based fMRI). Participants looked at a fixation cross during
rest, and looked at alternating blocks of words and checkerboards during
reading. The task-based reading network was identified via a contrast of
word and checkerboard conditions. The RS reading network was identified
using an area of the left fusiform gyrus (the Visual Word Form Area) as a
seed region, with time-series correlations computed between this region
and all other voxels. Comparisons of RS and task-based networks were
carried out using conjunction and other analyses. Results show: (1) the RS
reading network is highly consistent both across participants and within
participants (across scan sessions); (2) there are greater similarities between
the task-based reading network and the RS reading network than between
the task-based reading network and non-reading RS networks (e.g., the
Default Mode Network). These findings indicate that the RS reading network may provide a good and robust estimate of the task-based reading
network.

B64
THE FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR MORPHOLOGY: A NEUROANATOMICAL META-ANALYSIS
Rachael E. Campbell1, Goldie Ann McQuaid1, Kaitlyn M. Tagarelli1, Peter E.
Turkeltaub1, Michael T. Ullman1; 1Georgetown University — Regular and irreg-

ular morphology has been the focus of intense study as a model of the
neurocognitive bases of language. Numerous studies have examined the
regular/irregular distinction with functional neuroimaging. However, a
clear picture has yet to emerge, due to apparent inconsistencies in findings. We therefore conducted a comprehensive quantitative meta-analysis
of the functional neuroanatomy of regular and irregular morphology. We
used Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE), a probabilistic method for
quantifying spatial reproducibility in neuroimaging studies. Seven studies examining both regular and irregular morphology qualified for ALE
analysis. Analyses revealed that only left BA 44 showed reliable activation
(p < .001), and only for regulars. The seven contributing studies actually
reported more activation foci for irregulars, but these were more broadly
distributed. Eight additional studies examining only regular morphology
were then identified. This “replication” dataset also yielded reliable activation only in left BA 44, and only for regulars. Across the two datasets,
the contributing studies showed diversity in language/language family
(e.g., English, Spanish, Japanese, Korean, Finnish), inflection and derivation (e.g., tense and agreement, nominal and verbal derivation), and task
(e.g., expressive and receptive), underscoring the generalizability of the
results. The findings indicate that regulars, like syntax, are reliably tied to
left BA 44, while irregulars fail to show this pattern. The study provides a
fine-grained analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of regular/irregular
morphology that dissociates regulars and irregulars, and links only regulars to the rule-based processing of syntax, consistent with “dual system”
models of language.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
B65
NETWORK ANALYSIS OF ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE WORD
PROCESSING IN HEALTHY AGING AND APHASIA Chaleece Sandberg1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Normal subjects and persons with

aphasia exhibit a ‘concreteness effect’ during a variety of lexical tasks.
Recent evidence from neuroimaging studies suggests possible dissociable
neural correlates for processing abstract versus concrete words. However,
this work has focused largely on healthy younger adults. Only one study
has examined neural correlates of the concreteness effect in both neurologically healthy older adults (NHOA) and persons with aphasia (PWA), but
this study had a limited number of subjects in each group (N=3) and did
not explore functional connectivity within the abstract and concrete word
processing networks (Sandberg & Kiran, 2013). The current study used
graph theoretical analysis to explore abstract and concrete word processing

Poster Session B
in NHOA and PWA to shed more light on the concreteness effect. Thirteen
(6 M) NHOA aged 50-67 and ten (7 M) PWA, in the chronic stage of poststroke recovery, each completed a word judgment task during fMRI. Both
NHOA and PWA showed differences in both node degree and betweenness centrality between abstract and concrete network regions (e.g., higher
betweenness centrality in left inferior frontal cortex for abstract than concrete). Additionally, differences between NHOA and PWA were also noted
for both abstract and concrete networks (e.g., higher node degree in left
angular gyrus for PWA than NHOA). These results indicate that graph
theoretical analysis of functional connectivity for concrete versus abstract
networks in NHOA versus PWA may help identify neural correlates of the
concreteness effect in both aging and language disordered populations, to
help inform theories of the concreteness effect.

B66
TAXONOMIC AND THEMATIC ASSOCIATIONS IN THE BRAIN: AN
MEG STUDY Gwyneth A. Lewis1, David Poeppel1, Gregory L. Murphy1; 1New
York University — Converging evidence from behavioral and neuroimaging

studies of human concepts indicate distinct neural systems for taxonomic
and thematic knowledge. A recent study of naming in aphasia found
involvement of the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) during taxonomic (feature-based) processing, and involvement of the temporoparietal junction
(TPJ) during thematic (function-based) processing. We conducted an online
magnetoencephalography (MEG) study to examine the spatio-temporal
nature of taxonomic and thematic relations. We measured participants’
brain responses to words preceded by either a taxonomically or thematically related item (e.g., cottage-castle, king-castle). In a separate experiment
we collected “relatedness” ratings of the word pairs from participants. We
examined effects of relatedness and relation type on activation in ATL and
TPJ regions of interest (ROIs) using permutation t-tests to identify differences in ROI activation between conditions as well as single-trial correlational analyses to examine the millisecond-by-millisecond influence of the
stimulus variables on the ROIs. Taxonomic relations strongly predicted
ATL activation, and both kinds of relations influenced the TPJ. These
effects occurred over a time window similar to that of lexical access. Our
results further strengthen the view of the ATL’s importance to taxonomic
knowledge. Moreover, they provide a nuanced view of thematic relations
as involving taxonomic knowledge.

B68
PATTERNS OF NEURAL ACTIVITY IN THE RESIDUAL TISSUES PREDICT PICTURE-NAMING PERFORMANCE- A CASE FMRI STUDY
ON APHASIA USING MULTIVOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS (MVPA)
Yune-Sang Lee1,2, Jihad Zreik1,2, Roy Hamilton1,2; 1Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania — Despite some degree of spontaneous language recovery occurs over

time in patients with aphasia after stroke, object naming often remains a
challenging task for these individuals. This could be due to the possibility
that the reorganized compensatory language network may include components that are inefficient to language processing. We hypothesized that
unreliable neural processing could be instantiated by patterns, rather than
the amplitude of neural activity within the compensatory language system.
We recruited a chronic aphasic patient (KL; 66 year-old male) who showed
a semantic deficit (e.g., “milk” for “cow”), and whose naming performance
fell within the moderate range of impairment on the Western Aphasia Battery. Over the course of five behavioral sessions involving a naming task in
a mock scanner, we identified seven visual objects that yielded an approximately 50% naming success rate. We then conducted two fMRI sessions
where the patient performed a naming task for those 7 object categories.
Multivoxel pattern-analysis (MVPA) revealed that right fusiform gyrus
yielded differential activity patterns associated with correct or incorrect
trials. Notably, this region has been implicated in the intermediate stages
of object recognition processing, as reflected by the propensity for patients
with lesions to this area to make semantic errors. By contrast, conventional
fMRI analysis failed to identify this region. To our knowledge, this is the
first fMRI study to predict naming performance based upon neural activity
patterns within intact cortical tissue, and also the first to demonstrate useful
application of MVPA in studies of language disorders.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

75

Poster Session B

B69
GETTING AHEAD OF YOURSELF: PARAFOVEAL WORD EXPECTANCY MODULATES THE N400 DURING SENTENCE READING
Mallory C. Stites1, Brennan R. Payne2, Kara D. Federmeier2; 1State University of
New York at Binghamton, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — One of

the biggest debates in the reading literature is whether readers can extract
semantic information from the parafovea (i.e., the next word in the sentence). Eye-tracking findings are mixed, but emerging evidence using
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) suggests that semantic anomalies
can be detected parafoveally (Barber, van der Meij, & Kutas, 2013). We use
ERPs to ask whether the expectancy of a parafoveal word can affect the processing of the currently fixated word. In a flanker-word RSVP paradigm,
sentences were presented word-by-word, flanked 2° bilaterally by the previous and upcoming words. Stimuli were high constraint sentences that
were identical up to the target word, which could be expected (cloze>.9),
unexpected but plausible (cloze=0), or anomalous (cloze=0). We predicted
that if readers accessed the semantics of the target in the parafovea, an N400
congruency effect would be observed to the identical, always congruent
pre-target word. Results supported our predictions: anomalous parafoveal
words elicited more negative N400s than expected words did. Additionally, unexpected parafoveal targets elicited significantly larger N400s than
expected targets, but were facilitated relative to anomalous words. Our
findings show that semantic processing as indexed by the N400 component can take place for parafoveal words, supporting previous ERP work
(Barber et al., 2013) and challenging eye-tracking findings that readers only
process the orthography of parafoveal words (Rayner, Schotter, & Drieghe,
2014). However, other aspects of processing, including positivities related
to the revision of predictions and explicit appreciation of semantic anomalies, are delayed until the word is fixated.

B70
BETA OSCILLATIONS REFLECT MEMORY AND MOTOR ASPECTS
OF SPOKEN WORD PRODUCTION Vitoria Piai1, Ardi Roelofs2, Joost Rommers3, Eric Maris2; 1UC Berkeley, 2Radboud University Nijmegen, 3University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Two major components form the basis of

spoken word production: the access of conceptual, lexical, and phonological information in long-term memory, and motor preparation and execution of an articulatory programme. Whereas the motor aspects of word
production have been well characterised as reflected in beta (15-25 Hz)
desynchronisation, the memory aspects have remained poorly understood.
Using magnetoencephalography, we investigated the neurophysiological
signature of not only motor but also memory aspects of spoken-word production. To probe the involvement of the memory component, we manipulated sentence context. Participants named or judged pictures after reading
sentences. Sentence contexts were either constraining or nonconstraining
towards the final word, presented as a picture. In the judgment task, participants indicated with a left-hand button press whether the picture was
expected given the sentence. In the naming task, they named the picture.
Naming and judgement were faster with constraining than nonconstraining contexts. Beta desynchronisation was found for constraining relative to
nonconstraining contexts pre-picture presentation. For the judgment task,
beta desynchronisation was observed in left posterior brain areas associated
with conceptual processing and in right motor cortex. For the naming task,
beta desynchronisation was found in the same left posterior brain areas, but
also in left anterior and posterior temporal cortex (associated with memory
aspects), left inferior frontal cortex, and bilateral ventral premotor cortex
(associated with motor aspects). Our results suggest that both memory and
motor components of spoken word production are reflected in overlapping
brain oscillations in the beta band.

B71
FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT IN PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA Marguerite McQuire1, Eileen E.R. Cardillo1, Michael F. Bonner1,
Murray Grossman1, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Previous

research indicates patients with focal lesions in the left hemisphere can
have metaphoric comprehension impairments in the absence of literal language difficulty. This pattern suggests figurative language abilities may be
especially vulnerable to brain injury. We test this possibility by considering
metaphoric and literal language comprehension in patients with a progres-

76

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
sive loss of language function. Specifically, we compared the performance
of 5 patients with the logopenic variant of primary progressive aphasia
(lvPPA) to 20 healthy, age- and education-matched controls on a metaphor
multiple choice task. Stimuli consisted of unfamiliar metaphors and closely
matched literal sentences with the same base term (The stepmother was a
wrecking ball / The hanging metal was a wrecking ball). Sentences were
presented visually, followed by four adjective-noun answer choices (target
+ three foil types). Participants were instructed to select the phrase that best
matched the meaning of the sentence. Results with healthy adults indicated
good comprehension in both conditions, with a slight advantage for literal than metaphoric sentences. Single case statistics comparing individual
patients to the control group indicated comparable literal comprehension
in all five patients but significantly impaired metaphor comprehension in
three of five patients. lvPPA patients with and without metaphor impairments were not distinguishable on the basis of general measures of cognitive function, nor several standard measures of literal language ability.
Patients with metaphor comprehension impairment tended to select foils
that were semantically related to the literal sense of the base term, suggesting an inability to derive the novel figurative sense.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
B72
BOOSTING AND LINKING: COOPERATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS OF
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY TO SUCCESSFUL MEMORY IN AGING Simon Davis1, Thomas Fink2, Roberto Cabeza1;
1
Duke University, 2Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich — Aging is associated
with a dynamic reorganization of communication between cortical regions,
both in the regions local to a given cognitive function in younger controls,
as well as more distant regions. While a number of studies have described
how brain regions work overtime in order to compensate for the deleterious
effects of age, a growing number of studies find that increases in functional
connectivity—independent of activity—predict sustained performance in
older populations. We used a task-based, full-brain fCON analysis in order
to assess the relative contribution of functional activity, functional connectivity, and structural connectivity to successful memory performance.
Older and younger performed a source memory task based on word pairs.
Functional and structural MR data during retrieval were used to evaluate a
structural equation model (SEM) built to characterize the relative contributions of a) regional activation, b) pairwise dynamic functional connectivity,
and c) white-matter connectivity, in supporting successful memory in older
adults. We found that the pattern of connections stronger for successfully
remembered trials varied dramatically between older and younger adults,
with younger adults relying on a network of posterior parieto-occipital
regions, while older adults relied on more long-range connectivity between
frontal and occipital cortices. SEM results demonstrate that both functional
and structural connectivity—but not functional activity—made independent contributions to memory success. These results suggest that successful
aging increases the reliance on long-range connectivity and demonstrate
a greater sensitivity to age-related changes in brain dynamics that is not
measurable in typical activity-based designs.

B73
CARDIORESPIRATORY FITNESS IS ASSOCIATED WITH COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE IN OLDER BUT NOT YOUNGER ADULTS
Scott M. Hayes1,2, Daniel E. Forman3,4, Mieke Verfaellie1,2; 1VA Boston Healthcare System, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3VA Pittsburgh Healthcare
System, 4University of Pittsburgh Medical Center — Aging is associated with
declines in executive function and episodic memory. Cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) has been associated with enhanced executive function in older
adults, but the relationship with episodic memory remains unclear. The
purpose of the study was to examine the relationship between CRF and
cognition in young and older adults and whether CRF mitigates age-related
cognitive decline. Participants completed exercise testing to evaluate CRF
(peak VO2) and neuropsychological testing to assess cognition. In older
adults, peak VO2 was positively related to executive function, as well as to
accuracy on an experimental face-name memory task and visual episodic

2015 Annual Meeting
memory. In young adults, a relationship between peak VO2 and cognition
was not evident. High fit older adults performed as well as young adults
on executive function measures. On episodic memory measures, young
adults performed better than high fit older adults, who in turn performed
better than low fit older adults. CRF is positively associated with executive
function and episodic memory in older adults and attenuates age-related
cognitive decline. We provide preliminary support for the age-dependence
hypothesis, which posits that cognition and CRF relationships may be most
readily observed during lifetime periods of significant neurocognitive
development.

B74
GAMMA OSCILLATORY DYSFUNCTION IN PREFRONTAL AND
TEMPORAL CORTICES IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Jessica Gilbert1, Sarah Adams1, Alexandra Stiles1, Rosalyn Moran1; 1Virginia Tech Carilion
Research Institute — Coordinated oscillations in membrane potentials pro-

vide a neurobiological basis for brain network efficiency. Non-uniform
neural circuitry disruption is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s diseases (AD)
dysfunction, disproportionately impacting prefrontal and temporal circuits. Our aim was to determine specific neural network dysfunction in
AD prefrontal and temporal circuitry during implicit and explicit memory
performance. Eight patients (6 females) diagnosed with mild to moderate
AD and 12 age-matched, sex-matched controls were scanned using EEG.
Subjects performed an implicit picture-naming task and explicit recognition task following an encoding session. At test, novel (N=50) and repeated
images (N=50) were presented. Naming facilitation (i.e., priming; Naming-Repeated) was not significantly different (p=0.32) between patients
(mean=0.06 s, SD=0.2) and controls (mean=0.09 s, SD=0.04), suggesting
relative sparing of implicit memory. Whole-brain source-localized gamma
(31-56 Hz) responses contrasting Novel > Repeated trials found intact lateral ventral temporal cortex activation for both patients and controls. In
contrast, in an explicit memory task of novel (N=50) and repeated pictures
(N=50), prominent differences in behavioral performance between groups
were observed (Control mean=74.8% correct, SD=5.6; AD mean=42.4%
correct, SD=11.6; p<0.01). Whole-brain source-localized gamma responses
contrasting Control > AD revealed regions in left anterior ventral temporal
cortex and right orbitofrontal cortex showing enhanced gamma, while the
contrast AD > Control revealed enhanced gamma responses for patients in
right prefrontal cortex. Taken together, these findings suggest a longitudinal temporal gradient in gamma dysfunction that correlates with behavioral sparing and impairment in AD.

B75
DEVELOPMENT OF HIPPOCAMPAL RESTING-STATE NETWORKS
DURING CHILDHOOD Tracy Riggins1, Sarah Blankenship1, Elizabeth
Redcay1, Lea Dougherty; 1University of Maryland, College Park — Although several studies have examined developmental changes in hippocampal structure during childhood, developmental changes in hippocampal function
during this period remain relatively underexplored. Functional development is an important question given the dramatic improvements observed
in behaviors thought to be subserved by this structure during this period
(e.g., memory). In the present investigation, we explored age-related differences in hippocampal function by exploring age-related differences
in the functional hippocampal network identified via rest. Participants
included 111 4- to 10-year-old children (M=81.5 months, SD=18.6, range =
48-130 months) who successfully completed a 6 minute resting-state scan.
Whole brain connectivity analyses with a bilateral hippocampal seed were
used to identify age-independent and age-dependent regions of the hippocampal network. Age-independent analyses revealed a hippocampal
network consistent with the mature hippocampal network identified in
adults (Vincent et al., 2006), including cingulate gyrus extending into retrosplenial cortex, inferior parietal cortex including bilateral angular gyri
and precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex, lateral temporal cortex, thalamus,
and cerebellum, ps<.0001, corrected. The age-dependent analyses revealed
increased connectivity with age in cingulate cortex extending into parietal
cortices and bilateral cerebellum, ps<.05, corrected. These results suggest
that the major components of the adult hippocampal network are relatively
intact by age 4; however, some regions do undergo protracted development throughout childhood. Identification of the specific trajectory of the
hippocampal functional network is an important question in its own right,

Poster Session B
however, these findings may also aid investigators examining both the typical and atypical development of hippocampally-mediated behaviors (e.g.,
episodic memory, stress responses).

B76
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN THE NEURAL BASIS OF METACOGNITIVE MONITORING PREDICT CHANGE IN MEMORY ACCURACY
OVER TIME Yana Fandakova1,2, Carter Wendelken2, Joshua Lee1, Silvia Bunge2,
Simona Ghetti1; 1University of California, Davis, 2University of California, Berkeley
— Flexible monitoring and control of one’s own memory enables effective
learning and goal-directed behavior. The ability to introspect on uncertainty and strategically withhold responses continues to develop during
middle childhood. The present study examined individual differences in
the neural underpinnings of metacognitive monitoring and control during
episodic retrieval and their contribution to memory development. Younger
children (N=44, 8-10 years), older children (N=45, 10-12 years) and adults
(N=30) encoded object-scene pairs followed by a source memory task while
undergoing fMRI scanning. During retrieval, participants could select an
‘I don’t know’ (DK) answer if they were uncertain about which scene had
been originally studied with the target object. Compared to correct source
decisions, DK responses were associated with increased activation in anterior insula, dorsal ACC, anterior PFC, and inferior parietal lobe. There were
no age differences in the insula that demonstrated increased engagement
for both incorrect source and DK decisions, in line with a role in uncertainty monitoring. Stronger insular engagement for these trials was associated with higher source accuracy across participants (r=.25, p=.006) and
predicted memory improvement in children 9 to 24 months later (r=.31,
p=.02). Anterior PFC and parietal regions were engaged specifically when
participants chose to withhold a source response by using the DK option,
indicating a role in metacognitive control of memory retrieval. The specificity of the APFC activation profile was reduced in younger children who
showed lower source accuracy and higher DK response rates. These results
underscore the role of metacognitive monitoring and control for memory
development.

B77
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
TASK-UNRELATED THOUGHTS AND UNSUCCESSFUL EPISODIC
MEMORY ENCODING IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS David Maillet1, Natasha Rajah2; 1Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 2Department of Psychiatry, McGill University — In the current study, we investigated

neural mechanisms during episodic encoding that can lead to two types of
memory errors during a later episodic retrieval task: forgetting, and source
misattributions (false memories). Twenty-one young and 20 older adults
underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while encoding
words by making a pleasant/unpleasant or a man-made/natural judgement. Frequency and neural correlates of task-unrelated thoughts (TUT)
were measured with thought probes during encoding. A source retrieval
task followed (not scanned), in which subjects indicated in which of the
two encoding tasks they had studied each word. There were no age-related
differences in frequency of TUT at encoding or in frequency of forgotten
words at retrieval. Across groups, frequency of TUT at encoding positively
predicted the amount of forgetting at retrieval. Furthermore, subsequently
forgotten words and encoded words preceding TUT reports were associated with similar activations, including posterior cingulate and dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex. In contrast with forgotten items, there was an age-related
increase in source misattributions. In older adults, words studied in the
man-made/natural task were mistakenly claimed to have been studied in
the pleasantness task. This source misattribution in older adults was associated with increased activation in regions typically involved in encoding
using a pleasantness judgement, i.e. medial prefrontal cortex. We conclude
that forgetting and source misattributions are associated with distinct phenomena at encoding; the former with exhibiting TUT, and the latter with
reduced differentiation between the neural representation of different
sources. Moreover, older adults may be especially prone to source attribution errors.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

77

Poster Session B

B78
AGE EFFECTS ON HIPPOCAMPAL FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DURING MULTIFEATURAL ENCODING Chris Foster1, Milton Picklesimer1, Neil Mulligan1, Kelly Giovanello1; 1The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill — During successful episodic memory encoding in young adults

(YAs), functional connectivity of the hippocampus decouples from other
regions of the Default Mode Network (DMN) to allow for efficient memory
formation (Huijbers et al., 2011). The current study tested the hypothesis
that older adults (OAs) would show a comparable decoupling of the hippocampus from the DMN during multifeatural source encoding. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging was conducted while YAs and OAs intentionally encoded words along with their color and location. Through our
experimental design, memory accuracy was deliberately equated between
YAs and OAs. Univariate analyses revealed that successful multifeatural
encoding, as compared to single item encoding, activated several regions in
both age groups, including the left hippocampus. Additionally, while YAs
deactivated parietal cortex during multifeatural encoding, OAs deactivated
frontal regions. Functional connectivity analyses using left hippocampus
as a seed region revealed a set of primarily frontal regions (e.g., superior
and middle frontal gyrus and anterior cingulate) that were functionally correlated with the left hippocampus in YAs. In contrast, hippocampal activity
among OAs correlated with bilateral superior, inferior, and middle temporal gyrus, as well as left angular and left supramarginal gyrus. Reductions in DMN activity and hippocampal connectivity are consistent with
prior studies and have been suggested to support efficient encoding in YAs.
Older adults, however, are less able to decouple the DMN even during successful episodic encoding. Given that functional connectivity differences
manifested under equivalent behavioral performance, alterations to functional networks appear to precede age-related behavioral changes in source
memory encoding.

B79
SLEEP BEFORE LEARNING IMPROVES EMOTIONAL MEMORY
IN YOUNG CHILDREN Rebecca Spencer1, Laura Kurdziel1, Maria Pietri;
1
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst — Colloquially, parents and teachers find nap-deprived children

to be emotionally disregulated. We posit that emotional memory encoding
after a nap differs from encoding following wake as recent memories are
consolidated over the nap (Kurdziel, Duclos & Spencer, 2013) providing a
‘clean slate’ for encoding new memories. To test this, 22 children (M=51.89,
SD=7.64 months) encoded neutral expression faces paired with either
mean or nice descriptions (based on Kinzler & Shutts, 2007). Immediate
recall was probed by presenting a subset of images, paired with a distractor, and participants responded as to which was familiar. Encoding and
immediate recall took place 30 minutes after a mid-day nap in a preschool
classroom. One week prior or after (conditions separated by 1 week), the
procedures were repeated but encoding took place following an equivalent interval awake. In both conditions, delayed recall was probed the following morning. There was no immediate benefit of the nap on emotional
memory: immediate recall accuracy did not differ in the post-nap and postwake conditions (t(21)=1.368, p=0.186). Likewise, there was no difference
in performance across conditions when memory was probed the following morning (t(21)=1.252, p=0.225). However, when performance on mean
and nice items was segregated, a delayed benefit of the nap for nice items
(t(21)=2.632, p=0.016), but not mean items (t(21) = -0.554, p=0.585), was evident. In sum, we find that naps protect recent memories and facilitate new
learning. Such evidence is important for establishing guidelines around
nap opportunities in preschool classrooms.

B80
FORNIX MICROSTRUCTURE CORRELATES WITH EPISODIC
MEMORY IN OLDER ADULTS Jonathan T Siegel1,2, Marianne de Chastelaine1,2, Julia T Mattson3, Tracy H Wang1,2, Brian E Donnelly1,2, Kristen M Kennedy1,2, Michael D Rugg1,2; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, 2The Center for
Vital Longevity and School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas
at Dallas, 3UT Southwestern Medical Center — The role of the fornix and its
relationship to memory function is not completely understood. Although
the fornix is recognized as an important white matter tract that couples

78

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
the medial temporal lobe (MTL) with subcortical and cortical regions, its
involvement regarding specific types of memory and learning is more complex. This tract may facilitate communication between these brain regions,
and previous research has reported an association with fornix integrity and
recollection-related recognition memory; however, no relationship concerning changes in fornix microstructure and familiarity-driven recognition have been described. Furthermore, only a few studies have attempted
to investigate how microstructural integrity of the fornix may be related to
age-related differences in episodic memory. The current study used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to examine whether differences in white matter
integrity of the fornix, assessed via fractional anisotropy (FA), were correlated with differences in episodic memory performance. Associative recognition and familiarity, along with performance on standardized memory
tests, were evaluated in 142 healthy participants aged 18 to 76 years of age.
In older adults only, greater microstructural integrity in the fornix correlated with performance on both the California Verbal Learning Test and
the Logical Memory subtests of the Wechsler Memory Scale. No significant
relationship between integrity of the fornix and either associative or familiarity memory was found for any age group. Our results raise questions
regarding the specificity of the relationship between integrity of the fornix
and memory performance, and how this varies across the lifespan.

B81
SUBJECTIVE MEMORY COMPLAINTS IN OLDER ADULTS ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH RELATIONAL MEMORY ERRORS IN SPATIAL
RECONSTRUCTION Heather D. Lucas1, Patrick D. Watson1, Jim M. Monti1,
Edward McAuley1, Arthur F. Kramer1, Neal J. Cohen1; 1University of Illnois at
Urbana-Champaign — Subjective memory complaints (SMCs) often motivate

older adults to seek medical evaluation for age-related memory disorders.
Moreover, SMCs among healthy elderly individuals are associated with
increased rates of subsequent conversion to Alzheimer’s disease, indicating that memory complaints can have both prognostic and diagnostic
value. However, SMCs are extremely common in old age and likely stem
from multiple causes, suggesting a need for sensitive and efficient methods to vet or corroborate reports of memory difficulties. Here we examined whether certain types of memory errors are more likely than others to
relate to SMCs. Older adult participants completed a spatial reconstruction
task in which they viewed and then attempted to recreate a series of complex, multi-item displays. This task allows for the quantification of multiple aspects of performance, including errors that are highly relational in
nature (e.g. the pairwise “swapping” of relative item locations), as well as
more traditional error metrics such as item misplacement. We found higher
rates of “swap” errors, but not misplacement errors, in higher- relative to
lower- SMC participants. This relationship remained after controlling for
age and anxiety levels, which were also associated with SMCs. This pattern
suggests a selective impairment in relational memory among older adults
with memory complaints. Such selectivity is consistent with the presence
of early pathology within the hippocampus—a brain region linked to
relational processing—and underscores the potential utility of relational
memory tests to detect preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease.

B82
DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGE IN RELATIONAL BINDING AND HIPPOCAMPAL STRUCTURE Joshua K Lee1, Carter Wendelken2, Lauren
Hunter1, Peter Desautels1, Silvia A Bunge2, Simona Ghetti1; 1University of California, Davis, 2University of California, Berkeley — Episodic memory, the capacity to remember the past in detail, is supported by operations that bind
arbitrary spatial, temporal, and associative features to form an integrated
event-representation; operations the hippocampus is posited to support.
Little is known about the development of binding and whether the hippocampus contributes to that development. In a longitudinal sample of
children aged 7-12 (time-1: n=151; time-2: n=61, 120-projected; ∆time=1-2
years), and young adults (time-1: n=28;time-2: n=6,22 projected; ∆time=1-2
years), we examined the development of item-space, item-time, and itemitem binding using a single experimental paradigm, and examined how
development of binding related to volumes of hippocampal head, body,
and tail and cytoarchitectural subfields, as assessed from segmentation of
0.35x0.35x0.70mm MPRAGE and 0.22x0.22x0.95mm T2-weighted scans,
respectively. In each binding task, three items appeared to three positions
in order. Depending on task, participants learned the positions, orders, or

2015 Annual Meeting
associations between items. After three encoding trials, memory for the
relations was tested. Cross-sectional analysis revealed a significant task X
age interaction such that item-space binding reached adult performance
by middle-childhood, item-time binding by late-childhood, and item-item
binding after childhood. In longitudinal analysis, the volumes of hippocampal body inversely predicted developmental change in overall capacity to bind relations; analysis of subfields suggested that this relation was
predicated upon CA3/DG, but not CA1. Together, these results support
the hypothesis that binding operations develop in childhood and that longitudinal improvements are associated with hippocampal structure. Further analyses will examine whether longitudinal changes in hippocampal
structure differentially relate to developmental improvements in binding.

B83
COMBINED PHYSICAL EXERCISE AND COGNITIVE TRAINING
ENHANCES HIPPOCAMPAL-DEPENDENT MEMORY Ilana B Clark1,
Jennifer J Heisz1; 1McMaster University — There is an established link between

exercise, neurogenesis, and cognition. Most of this research has focused
on non-human animal models, with little known about the effects of exercise on cognition in younger adults. Both physical exercise and cognitive
training independently induce hippocampal neurogenesis in animals, suggesting that these different forms of training may work through synergistic
neurological pathways to benefit memory in younger adults. The present
study examined the effects of physical exercise and cognitive training on
hippocampal-mediated memory processes in younger adults, to determine
whether combined training yields synergistic benefits. Fifty-nine sedentary
young adults (29 females; age range 18-30 years) were randomly assigned
to one of four groups: 1) exercise training group, 2) cognitive training
group, 3) combined exercise and cognitive training group, or 4) control
group. Memory performance was assessed before and after the intervention on the Pattern Separation task, which targets the dentate gyrus and
is associated with hippocampal neurogenesis. Preliminary results reveal
that exercise training was associated with improved memory performance
(p<0.06). Critically, combining exercise and cognitive training led to the
greatest change in memory performance (p<0.01), suggesting exercise and
cognitive training may work through synergistic pathways to support hippocampal function. The results demonstrate that different lifestyle activities can interact to improve memory.

B84
SEMANTIC OBJECT MEMORY RETRIEVAL IN AMNESTIC MILD
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY Athula Pudhiyidath1, Hsueh-Sheng Chiang1, Raksha A. Mudar2, Jeffrey
S. Spence1, Kyle B. Womack1, C. Munro Cullum3, Jeremy Tanner4, Michael A.
Kraut4, John Hart, Jr.1; 1Center for BrainHealth at the University of Texas at Dallas,
2
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, 3University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 4The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Amnestic

mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) is a transitional clinical state between
normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Individuals with aMCI have been
shown to have semantic memory deficits, but the evidence for the neural
underpinnings of this semantic deterioration thus far has been scant. In
the present study, 17 normal control subjects (12 female; mean age = 64.9)
and 16 patients with aMCI (6 female; mean age = 69.7) underwent an EEG
task in which they performed the Semantic Object Retrieval Test (SORT), a
test which specifically targets object feature integration and object memory
retrieval. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured and analyzed
using a multi-variate analytical approach (STAT-PCA). Our results showed
that aMCI patients (82.8%) performed significantly less accurately (p
= .001) on the task than the controls (90.3%). Both groups showed a left
fronto-temporal ERP component with successful retrievals (750-1000 ms
post-stimulus). However, compared to controls, the aMCI patients showed
an increased but delayed ERP difference (950-1050 ms post-stimulus) in
fronto-parietal scalp potential between retrieval and non-retrieval conditions. These differences may reflect more effortful or compensatory neural
mechanisms used by those with aMCI compared to controls; this in turn
may be suggestive of some early signs of synaptic changes associated with
aMCI within the cortical functions which underlie semantic object memory
retrieval.

Poster Session B

B85
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, MOTIVATION, AND MEMORY IN HEALTHY,
AGING ADULTS Kristin Duffy1, Arthur Kramer1; 1University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Physical activity is known to positively influence both

the memory and motivation systems. Despite anatomical and functional
connectivity of these systems, little research has investigated the intersection of these two constructs, particularly in the context of physical activity.
This study used the monetary-incentive encoding (MIE) task to investigate
whether physical activity (PA) level modulates motivationally driven episodic memory in healthy, aging adults (65 - 80 years old). During the MIE
task, high PA (N=9) and low PA (N=5) participants viewed a monetary
cue that indicated how much money they would win if they remembered
the subsequent scene image during a memory test twenty-four hours later.
Unlike previous work in young adults, older adults demonstrated reduced
monetary reward sensitivity, remembering both high-valued and low-valued scene images equally well. Although there were no memory differences between the two groups, an independent t-test revealed that high
PA participants had higher self-reported motivation to remember both
high-valued (p=0.16) and low-valued (p=0.03) scene images than low PA
participants. We calculated d-prime, a measure of memory that accounts
for both hit rate and false alarm rate. We found that regardless of physical
activity, body-mass index was negatively correlated with d-prime (p=0.11).
Although preliminary, these results suggest that older adults may have
reduced reward sensitivity to monetary rewards and physical activity may
modulate motivation level in this task. Furthermore, body-mass index may
be a better predictor of memory performance in a motivation-memory task
in older adults.

B86
UNITIZATION SUPPORTS RELATIONAL LEARNING IN HEALTHY
AGING AND AMNESIC CASES Maria C. D’Angelo1, Arber Kacollja1, Victoria M. Smith2, Jennifer S. Rabin3, Felicia Zhang2, Malcolm A. Binns1,2, R. Shayna
Rosenbaum1,3, Morgan D. Barense1,2, Jennifer D. Ryan1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, 2University of Toronto, 3York University — The relational memory
theory of hippocampal function emphasizes the role of the hippocampus
in forming lasting representations regarding arbitrary relations among distinct items. The transverse patterning (TP) task has often been used to evaluate the integrity of relational binding and hippocampal function. In TP,
individuals learn the relations among three items, where each item wins in
the context of one item and loses in the context of the other item. Consistent
with relational memory theory, amnesic patients show impaired learning
of novel relations in TP. Similarly, older adults show deficits in TP and
these deficits correlate with age-related reductions in hippocampal volumes. Here we examined whether a unitization strategy could circumvent
relational memory deficits in TP. We tested TP under standard and unitized
conditions in a developmental amnesic case (N.C.) and in older adults. As
in prior work, N.C. and the older adults showed impairments on standard
versions of TP. In the unitization conditions, participants were encouraged to form fused representations of the pairs of items interacting with
one another, highlighting the winner in each pair. Despite the impairments
on the standard version, cognitively intact older adults showed normal TP
performance in the unitized conditions. Older adults who failed the Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) (and thus may be at-risk for mild cognitive impairment) showed larger impairments in standard conditions and
no evidence of benefiting from the unitization strategy. Like cognitively
intact older adults, N.C. also benefited from unitization and, importantly,
showed evidence of transfer to novel stimuli in later sessions.

B87
DISTINCT ROLE OF ESTROGEN RECEPTOR MODULATORS ON
POSTMENOPAUSAL DIABETES-INDUCED MEMORY IMPAIRMENT IN RATS Kanwaljit Chopra1, Seema Bansal1; 1University Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences — Objective: Diabetes and menopause are frequent
comorbidities. Expression pattern of estrogen receptors varies in diabetes
resulting in differential effects of estrogen on neuronal and vascular functions. The objective of the present study was to delineate the effects of nonselective and selective ER agonists (α and β) on cognitive function in ovariectomized diabetic rats. Methods: Bilateral ovariectomy was performed
in female Sprague dawley rats (200-250g) and streptozotocin was used to
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

79

Poster Session B
induce experimental diabetes. Rats were administered with 10 μg/kg/s.c.
of a nonselective estrogen receptor agonist, 17-β estradiol (E2), selective
ER-α agonist (4, 4’, 4’’-(4-propyl-[1H] pyrazole-1, 3, 5-triyl) tris phenol
(PPT) and selective ER-β agonist, 2, 3-bis (4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile
(DPN) for four weeks after STZ injection. Results: Marked impairment in
memory coupled with a marked decrease in brain derived neurotrophic
factors (BDNF) and increase in acetylcholinesterase activity were observed
in ovariectomized diabetic rats as compared to sham rats. However, partial
change in all these parameters was observed in ovariectomized or diabetic
rats as compared to sham rats. Treatment with DPN and 17-β estradiol
markedly while PPT treatment partially mitigated functional and neurotrophic factor changes induced in ovariectomized diabetic rats. Serum
estradiol levels and uterine weights were used to assess feminizing action
of allthe agents. 17-β estradiol reversed Ovx-induced decrease in serum
estradiol levels and uterine weights but PPT and DPN treatment did not
show any effect. Conclusion: Specific, ER-β agonists ameliorate memory
dysfunction associated with postmenopausal diabetes and are devoid of
feminizing side effects of non selective ER agonists.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
B88
CONFIDENT FALSE MEMORIES FOR SPATIAL LOCATION ACTIVATE CONTRALATERAL VISUAL REGIONS Jessica M. Karanian1, Scott D.
Slotnick1; 1Boston College — Previous work has shown that true memory for
feature-specific information (e.g., spatial location, motion, shape) activates
the corresponding early sensory cortical regions. For instance, true memory
for spatial location can activate contralateral visual regions (i.e., memory
for items previously presented in the left visual field activates right visual
regions and vice versa). By comparison, false memory for feature-specific
information activates later cortical regions, including those involved in language processing. In the present study, we investigated whether false memories for spatial location associated with higher confidence would, like true
memories, activate contralateral visual regions. During encoding, sixteen
participants viewed abstract shapes to the left or right of fixation. During
retrieval, old shapes were presented at fixation and participants indicated
whether each shape was previously in the “left” or “right” visual field followed by an unsure-sure-very sure confidence rating. Data was acquired
at 3T with a 32-channel head coil and a random-effect general linear model
analysis was conducted. Preliminary analysis revealed that confident false
memory for the left spatial location (i.e., “left”/right) produced activity in
right visual regions, while confident false memory for the right spatial location (i.e., “right”/left) produced activity in left visual regions. Moreover,
this contralateral pattern of retrieval activity occurred within the same
contralateral regions associated with perception/encoding (joint p-value <
0.001, corrected for multiple comparisons to p < 0.05). The present results
suggest that reconstruction of higher confidence feature-specific false memories can produce activity in contralateral sensory cortical regions, which
correspond to subjective experience rather than objective location.

B89
HIPPOCAMPAL AND ENTORHINAL INTEGRITY PREDICT ACCURACY OF SPATIO-TEMPORAL RECONSTRUCTION. Patrick Watson1,
Gillian Cooke1, Kelsey Campbell1, Nirav Patel1, Faizan Khawaja1, Neal Cohen1;
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Mental reconstruction critically

depends upon hippocampal integrity (Watson et al. 2013, Monti 2014). Yet
it is unclear if this reconstruction error arises from disrupted spatial processing, failure to encode object-locations, or interference between related
items. To investigate this, we constructed a spatio-temporal reconstruction
task that involved reconstructing sequences or arrays of computer generated creatures. Two sets of 20 College-aged younger adults performed the
spatial or temporal versions of the task, while one set of 20 older adults (6585), performed the spatial version. Younger adults found sequentially presented creatures significantly more difficult than the simultaneously presented spatial arrays. Older adults scored above chance at reconstructing
spatial arrays, but below younger adults, and their reconstruction scores
were related to hippocampal volume and entorhinal cortex thickness. To
identify memory strategies, participants in all conditions were eye tracked
during study, and in a stimulus preview period immediately before recon-

80

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
struction. During the preview period of the temporal version of the task,
participants spent disproportionate time viewing stimuli they later configured incorrectly. This was not the case during study. Taken together, these
findings generally support the account that errors in reconstruction arise
from failure to correctly resolve bindings at reconstruction time.

B90
CONSOLIDATION-DEPENDENT CHANGES IN ASSOCIATIVE
MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS Alexa Tompary1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York
University — Theories of systems-level consolidation propose that the neural
traces of episodic memories become distributed across cortical regions over
time (Alvarez and Squire 1994; Nadel et al. 2000). This is thought to be
achieved through ongoing communication between the hippocampus and
cortex (McClelland 1995). While recent work has provided evidence for
enhanced hippocampal-cortical connectivity with consolidation (Gais et al.
2007; Vilberg & Davachi 2013), it is less clear how consolidation changes the
representations of individual memories and links between related memories over time. We developed an fMRI study to test whether associative
links are strengthened within and across memories after a 1-week retention
interval. In the first scan session, subjects encoded object-scene pairs, where
each object was paired with 1 of 4 repeating scenes. Object recognition and
scene recall were then tested both immediately and after 1 week. Preliminary imaging data show that during object recognition, (1) hippocampal
connectivity with PPA increased from the immediate to delayed test, and
(2) at the delayed test, both hippocampal-PPA connectivity and PPA activation reflected later scene memory. These initial results suggest that incidental reactivation of an object’s associated scene was greater after a delay,
providing evidence for a strengthening of associations with time. Future
analyses will use pattern similarity to further characterize how consolidation changes associative memory representations.

B91
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION IMPROVES
ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY IN INDIVIDUALS WITH DEPRESSION.
Cheryl Abellanoza1, James Schaeffer1, Heekyeong Park1; 1University of Texas
- Arlington — The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) is important for

both working memory and long-term memory, such that DLPFC activity
promotes associative memory by forming relational processing between
items during on-line processing. fMRI studies have shown that increased
DLPFC activity during encoding relates to successful associative memory
in normal controls. Neuropsychological patients, including depression
patients, show disorders in DLPFC activity, along with impairments in
associative memory. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is
a noninvasive, safe, and cost-effective form of brain stimulation that is a
useful tool for examining the causal relationship between brain areas and
cognitive functions. The present study investigated whether tDCS of the
left DLPFC would enhance associative memory in individuals with depressive symptoms. Subjects (depression, control) engaged in a double-blind,
two-session (anodal, sham) study where they studied items and completed item and associative memory tests. tDCS was administered prior
to memory tasks. For item memory test, subjects studied a list of items
and made “old/new” recognition judgments with confidence ratings. For
associative memory test, subjects studied word pairs and indicated if test
pairs were studied in the same pairing at study (“intact”), studied but with
different pairings (“rearranged”), or not studied (“new”). Results showed
that only the depression group showed enhanced associative memory after
anodal tDCS administration. However, such memory enhancement effects
due to tDCS were not found in item memory. Control subjects did not show
any difference due to tDCS. These findings demonstrate the role of DLPFC
in associative memory and the nature of memory deficits in depression.

B92
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECOLLECTION AND REINSTATEMENT DURING
EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL Emily K. Leiker1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1;
1

University of Missouri — Neuroimaging studies of episodic memory have consistently demonstrated that memory retrieval involves reinstating patterns
of neural activity that were present at the time of encoding. The magnitude
of reinstatement effects has further been shown to be related to phenomenological experiences associated with retrieval, such as whether qualitative

2015 Annual Meeting
information is recollected and the amount of such information recollected.
At the neural level, however, interactions between reinstatement and other
neural correlates of recollection, which are typically active regardless of the
nature of retrieved information, are not well-characterized. In the current
study, we used fMRI to investigate the functional connectivity between
neural reinstatement and activity in a network of recollection-sensitive
regions. Subjects (n = 16) viewed a series of words in the context of three
encoding tasks and then completed a two-step memory test in which they
identified the task (source) previously completed for a word, followed by
rating the confidence of that judgment. Multivariate pattern analyses were
conducted on fMRI data acquired during encoding and retrieval to provide
the reinstatement measure. Consistent with prior findings, reinstatement
magnitude increased with source-memory confidence. Additionally, trialby-trial changes in reinstatement were positively correlated with activity in
multiple regions of the recollection network, including the hippocampus,
posterior parietal cortex, and posterior cingulate. The findings of interactions among reinstatement- and recollection-related activity thus elucidate
the regions that are potentially involved in either guiding the completion of
the cortical patterns of reinstatement or monitoring retrieved information
in service of the memory decision.

B93
COMPARING PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO ASSOCIATIVE
ENCODING AND METAMEMORY Alexandra Gaynor1, Elizabeth Chua1,2;
1

The Graduate Center, The City University of New York, 2Brooklyn College, The City
University of New York — Previous neuroimaging research suggests the dor-

solateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) may be implicated in both associative
encoding and in metamemory judgments about one’s own learning. Here
we test whether the DLPFC plays a causal role in these processes using
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). Forty-five healthy adults
were randomly assigned to prefrontal (N=16), parietal (N=14), or sham
(N=15) tDCS conditions, wherein the active conditions involved 20 min
of stimulation at 2mA. During the study/tDCS phase, participants memorized 192 word pairs, and made a judgment of learning (JOL), a subjective
judgment regarding their ability to later recall information that is currently
retrievable. The next day, participants were presented with pairs of words,
half studied together (intact) and half rearranged from different pairs (rearranged) and asked to make an intact/rearranged decision. At the behavioral
level, preliminary analyses revealed that JOL accuracy for intact pairs was
significantly higher than rearranged pairs (p<0.001), suggesting that JOLs
may have been made based on the expectation of recognizing intact pairs,
rather than ability to distinguish between intact/rearranged pairs. There
was no difference between tDCS groups in JOLs. In terms of memory performance, a one-way ANOVA revealed a near-significant between-groups
difference for intact pairs (p<0.06); post hoc tests showed that memory for
intact pairs in the prefrontal tDCS condition was significantly lower than
the sham condition (p<0.05), and marginally lower than the parietal condition (p=0.075). These preliminary results suggest prefrontal tDCS may
have hindered memory for intact pairs by actually disrupting associative
encoding mechanisms, but not metamemory judgments.

B94
CLASSIFICATION OF EEG SIGNALS OF MEMORY BETWEEN
MUSICIANS AND NON-MUSICIANS Kin Ming KAM1, James Schaeffer1,
Shouyi Wang1, Heekyeong Park1; 1The University of Texas at Arlington — There

has been much interest in the beneficial effects of musical training on cognition. Previous studies have indicated that musical training was related to
better working memory and that these behavioral differences were associated with differences in neural activity in the brain. However, it was not
clear whether musical training impacts memory in general, beyond working memory. By recruiting professional musicians with extensive training,
we investigated if musical training has a broad impact on memory with
corresponding electroencephalography (EEG) signal changes, by using
working memory and long-term memory tasks with verbal and pictorial
items. Behaviorally, musicians outperformed on both working memory
and long-term memory tasks. A comprehensive EEG pattern study has
been performed, including various univariate and multivariate features,
time-frequency (wavelet) analysis, power-spectra analysis, and deterministic chaotic theory. The advanced feature selection approaches have also
been employed to select the most discriminative EEG and brain activation

Poster Session B
features between musicians and non-musicians. High classification accuracy (more than 95%) in memory judgments was achieved using Proximal Support Vector Machine (PSVM). For working memory, it showed
significant differences between musicians versus non-musicians during
the delay period. For long-term memory, significant differences on EEG
patterns between groups were found both in the pre-stimulus period and
the post-stimulus period on recognition. These results indicate that musicians’ memorial advantage occurs in both working memory and long-term
memory and that the developed computational framework using advanced
data mining techniques can be successfully applied to classify complex
human cognition with high time resolution.

B95
IGNORING ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES DURING RECOGNITION MEMORY JUDGMENT Jihyun Cha1, Diana Selmeczy1, Justin C. Cox2,
Ian G. Dobbins1; 1Washington University in St. Louis, 2Brown University — Pre-

dictive environmental cues about upcoming recognition probes trigger
robust parietal and prefrontal activation when probes violate cued expectations. In particular, left anterior angular gyrus, lateral premotor, and
anterior prefrontal regions previously associated with source monitoring,
demonstrated increased activation when environmental cues suggested an
upcoming item should be novel, yet it was perceived as familiar. We refer
to this as the unexpected familiarity activation response. Here we examine
whether cue induced behavioral biases must be present in order for the
unexpected familiarity activation response to occur by instructing participants to either use or ignore predictive environmental cues during their
recognition judgments in alternating scans. Behavioral data demonstrated
that the influence of cues was greatly dampened during ignore scans,
although their effects were not fully eliminated. Replicating prior work,
fMRI data under use instructions demonstrated the involvement of similar
prefrontal and parietal regions for unexpectedly familiar items. Critically,
during ignore instructions these regions showed preserved unexpected
familiarity responses with the exception of bilateral dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC). This suggests that DMPFC may be involved in the
intentional incorporation of cues, whereas the remaining prefrontal and
parietal responses track violations of cue-induced expectations even when
observers are not gaining a behavioral advantage from the environmental
cues. This is the first study to examine the neural consequences of ignoring
predictive environmental cues when subjects attempt to base their memory
judgments solely on internally derived memory evidence.

B96
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND
BEHAVIORAL MEASURES OF PROSPECTIVE MEMORY IN INDIVIDUALS WITH MILD AND SEVERE ACQUIRED BRAIN INJURY
Consuelo M.A Pedro1, Sarah A. Raskin1, Navneet Kaur1, Erin Aisenberg1, Tessa
Bloomquist1; 1Trinity College — Prospective memory (PM) involves the abil-

ity to form and realize intentions after a time delay (Einstein & McDaniel, 1990). This experiment aims to examine the relationship between
clinical measures of PM and an event-related potential paradigm (West
& Ross-Munroe, 2002). Electrophysiological data was collected while performing a computerized laboratory PM measure and was compared to a
clinical measure, the Memory for Intentions Screening Test (MIST) (Raskin,
Buckheit, & Sherrod, 2011) in healthy adults (HA), individuals with mild
acquired brain injury (mABI), and individuals with severe acquired brain
injury (sABI). Results revealed that individuals with sABI performed significantly worse than HA on all variables of the MIST except for the 24
hour task. Individuals with mABI and HA had no significant difference in
performance on all variables of the MIST. Similar findings were obtained
for the laboratory measure performance. MIST total score was found to correlate significantly with performance on the laboratory task and with the
formation LPC waveform, previously shown to differentiate intention trials
from ongoing trials. Both the N300 and formation LPC waveform were
found to differ significantly in amplitude between HA and sABI, while
between HA and mABI and between mABI and sABI, there was no significant difference. These findings indicate that individuals with sABI have
deficits in PM compared to HA. This suggests that individuals with mABI
do not have deficits in PM. Furthermore, given the relationship between the
measures, these findings support the validity of the MIST as a measure of
PM in these populations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

81

Poster Session B

B97
AUTONOMIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO ADAPTIVE MEMORY Jordan
DeKraker1, Chris Fiacconi1, Stefan Köhler1,2; 1Brain and Mind Institute, Department of Psychology, Western University, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest
Centre, Toronto, ON — Studies demonstrating a mnemonic benefit for encod-

ing words in a survival scenario have revived interest in how human
memory is shaped by evolutionary pressures. Prior work on the survival-processing advantage has largely examined cognitive factors as potential proximate mechanisms. The current study, by contrast, focused on
autonomic emotional arousal. Guided by the idea that a survival scenario
implies threat, we combined measures of heart rate (HR) with affective
ratings to probe the potential presence of fear bradycardia - a parasympathetically dominated HR deceleration triggered by threat. We replicated
the mnemonic advantage in behaviour, and found that the survival scenario was rated higher in negative arousal than a commonly used control
scenario. Critically, words encountered in the survival scenario were associated with more extensive HR deceleration, and this effect was directly
related to subsequent recall performance. Our findings identify autonomic
emotional arousal as a potent proximate mechanism for the survival processing advantage.

B98
SOURCE MEMORY FAILURES: COMPARING SOURCE MISATTRIBUTION TO CONTEXT OF FALSE MEMORIES Meagan O’Neill1, Heather
Lustig1, Rachel Diana1; 1Virginia Tech — Episodic memory is subject to many
types of errors. One such error is a false memory, or memory for an event
that did not occur. Theoretically, false memories should not contain any
contextual information. However, these memories often involve some
form of contextual information. Another error is source misattributions,
or a memory for an event with incorrect contextual information. Despite
these contextual errors being studied independently, little is known about
how they interact. We investigated these errors within one task, induced
by the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm. Participants studied semantically-related lists with the same contextual detail (background color). All
words converged on a single semantically-related word, known as the critical lure. The critical lure was either not shown (in the false memory condition) or shown in a novel background color that did not match the color
of the semantically-related list (in the source misattribution condition). If a
false memory was induced, participants overwhelmingly contributed the
contextual information to the semantically-related list’s background color.
However, source misattribution caused a conflict in contextual information
recall. Participants chose the background color of the list or that of the critical lure equally. These results emphasize that recalling false memories and
recalling incorrect contextual details are separate processes. Furthermore,
these results allow us to test the neural correlates of the processes directly,
as they can be induced through the same task. This is the first study to
examine these simultaneously. The study informs us about the memory
process and furthers our knowledge of errors in memory.

B99
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL EXPERIENCE, SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE,
AND NOVELTY MODULATE THE HIPPOCAMPAL RESPONSE TO
LABORATORY-BASED EPISODIC RECOLLECTION OF SPATIAL
SCENES S. W. Baker1, K. K. Szpunar2, R. S. Rosenbaum1,3; 1York University,
2

Harvard University, 3Rotman Research Institute — It has been suggested that

the hippocampus (HC), known for its role in the encoding of new declarative memories, may be tuned to processing spatial scenes and/or other
types of relational information retrieved from Autobiographical Episodic
Memory (AEM). One possibility is that these memory processes and content may reflect a shared underlying process. If so, overlap in hippocampal
response to the encoding and retrieval of spatial scenes would be expected,
whether the scenes are known prior to the experiment due to personal experience or fame, or whether viewed for the first time. Another possibility
is that separable regions of the hippocampus are responsible for different
aspects of memory, segregated along the anterior-posterior axis. The present fMRI study set out to differentiate among these alternatives by directly
comparing, through the use of common control tasks, hippocampal activity during laboratory-based episodic memory of spatial landmarks and
scenes. Stimuli included autobiographically significant (personally visited),

82

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
semantically known (famous), and pre-experimentally unknown scenes.
Behavioral results indicated a performance advantage for personally visited and famous places vs. previously unknown places. Neuroimaging
results revealed greater activation in the anterior hippocampus in response
to episodic recollection of place stimuli with pre-experimental associations
and to the identification of unstudied unknown stimuli. Additional posterior hippocampal activation was unique to previously unknown places at
recall. The results confirm previous findings that the anterior hippocampus
may be more sensitive to episodic stimuli with pre-experimental contextual
associations. The posterior hippocampus may be sensitive to the encoding
and retrieval of newly learned novel scenes.

B100
TEMPORAL EXPECTANCY ENHANCES RECOGNITION MEMORY
Sathesan Thavabalasingam1, Edward B O’Neil1, Zheng Zeng1, Andy C H Lee1,2;
1
University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute — Exposure to temporal reg-

ularities in stimulus presentation can lead to the development of temporal expectancy, an anticipatory bias reflecting the successful extraction of
these regularities. While temporal expectancy has been shown to enhance
attentional focus and perceptual processing of relevant, incoming sensory
information, there has, to our knowledge, been little research on the impact
of temporal expectancy on long-term memory. Suggestive evidence that
temporal expectancy can impact mnemonic processing comes from recent
fMRI work demonstrating that the hippocampus is sensitive to the duration structure of events within sequences (Barnett et al., Neuropsychologia,
2014). To investigate this further, we presented mini-sequences of scene
images to participants within a structured or unstructured temporal framework. Specifically, we hypothesized that presenting events within a regular
interval duration structure may be associated with enhanced recognition
memory for these events. Pairwise comparisons of performance (d-prime
scores) revealed that memory was superior for scenes encoded within a
structured as opposed to unstructured temporal framework. This finding
was consistent across three separate behavioural experiments, regardless of
whether encoding was intentional or incidental (all p’s < .05). Additionally,
analysis of performance during early and late phases of retrieval revealed
that a structured temporal framework at encoding attenuated the negative
impact of retroactive interference (consequent of an accumulation of task
trials) on recognition memory. These findings indicate that temporal expectancy can impact long-term memory processing by potentially improving
the ability to encode information.

B102
BLOCKING GAP JUNCTIONS DURING SLEEP IMPAIRS DECLARATIVE MEMORY CONSOLIDATION IN HUMANS Gordon B. Feld1,
Andreas Fritsche1, Jan Born1, Manfred Hallschmid1; 1University of Tuebingen,
Germany — Sleep essentially contributes to the consolidation of declarative

memory. Declarative memory traces formed by highly plastic hippocampal
neuronal networks are initially labile. They are reactivated and stabilized
during nonREM (non rapid eye movement) sleep so that the hippocampus
gradually disengages in favor of cortical networks (“systems consolidation”). In rats this reactivation process has been shown to coincide with
sharp-wave/ripples, i.e., neuronal oscillations that are coordinated by slow
oscillations and sleep spindles, both of which hallmark nonREM sleep. Gap
junctions (direct electrical synapses between neurons) are assumed to play
a crucial role in generating sharp-wave/ripples. In the present study, we
investigated the contribution of gap junction signalling to sleep-dependent
declarative memory consolidation assessed by means of a word pair task
learned before sleep and retrieved thereafter. Sleep-associated gap junction activity was blocked by orally administering 250 mg mefloquine after
learning before 8 hours of nocturnal sleep. Blocking gap junctions during
sleep significantly reduced the retention of word pairs, whereas the amount
of polysomnographically evaluated slow wave sleep was increased. Our
results, for the first time, demonstrate a crucial involvement of the direct
electrical coupling between neurons in sleep-dependent declarative
memory consolidation.

2015 Annual Meeting

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development
& aging
B103
DYNAMICS OF NEUROMAGNETIC RESPONSE TO BIOLOGICAL
MOTION IN ADOLESCENCE Marina Pavlova1, Christel Bidet-Ildei2, Alexander Sokolov3; 1Department of Biomedical Magnetic Resonance, Medical School,
Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, 2Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition et
l’Apprentissage (CeRCA), CNRS-UMR 7295 ; and Department of Sport Sciences,
University of Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 3Center for Women’s Health, University
Hospital, Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany — Brain
imaging points to several brain regions engaged in the network subservingn visual processing of point-light body motion. However, temporal
dynamics of this network remains largely unknown. Here we focus on the
link between the visual sensitivity and neuromagnetic response to body
motion. Typically developing adolescents detected a point-light walker
embedded into a simultaneous scrambled walker mask. At early latencies
of 180-244 ms, the visual sensitivity to biological motion negatively correlates with the root-mean-square (RMS) amplitude of the evoked neuromagnetic response over the right occipital, temporal and frontal cortices
and over the left temporal cortex. At latencies of 276-340 ms, the visual
sensitivity negatively links with the RMS amplitude over the right occipital
and bilateral temporal cortices. At later latencies, there is still a tight inverse
link between visual sensitivity and activation over the temporal cortices of
both hemispheres. The outcome indicates that already in adolescence, the
right temporal cortex is a hub of the social brain circuitry. For the first time,
the topographic patterns of MEG activation unfolding over time and linked
to visual sensitivity reveal temporal dynamics of the entire cortical network
underpinning body motion processing.

B104
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY PREDICTS AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL SPECIFICITY IN THE VENTRAL VISUAL PATHWAY Jenny R. Rieck1, Kristen M. Kennedy1, Denise C. Park1; 1University of Texas
at Dallas — Young adults show robust differences in neural activity in the

ventral visual pathway associated with viewing face stimuli compared to
object stimuli (e.g., chairs, houses). In old age, differences in neural activity for processing face and object stimuli are less pronounced, a phenomenon termed “dedifferentiation” or “decreased neural specificity”. In the
current study we hypothesized that age-related degradation of underlying
white matter structure—specifically in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus
(ILF)—would account for age-related dedifferentiation of neural activity
in the ventral visual pathway. Our sample included 306 cognitively-normal adults, ages 20-89, from the Dallas Lifespan Brain Study. Participants
underwent diffusion tensor imaging, and ILF tracts were identified using
probabilistic tractography. Participants also underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging while passively viewing photographs of faces and
objects. Neural dedifferentiation was quantified using a metric of similarity
(i.e., Euclidian distance) between neural response to face versus objects—a
smaller distance was indicative of a more similar neural responses (e.g.,
dedifferentiated response). Using age and mean ILF fractional anisotropy
to predict functional activity, we show that decreased white matter integrity predicted dedifferentiation of neural response beyond the effect of age.
Further, we find an interactive effect of age and ILF integrity, such that ILF
integrity explained more variance in neural response for younger adults
compared to later stages of the lifespan. Our findings show a strong relationship between white matter integrity and functional activity that deteriorates with age, suggesting that additional factors in old age may be influencing the specificity of neural response in ventral visual pathway.

B105
ROLE OF CARDIORESPIRATORY FITNESS AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN AGE-RELATED CORTICAL ATROPHY Agnieszka Burzynska1,
Edward McAuley1, Arthur F Kramer1; 1University of Illinois — Advanced age is
associated with decreases in volume and structural integrity of the brain,
which coincides with cognitive decline. Previously, we demonstrated that
objectively measured cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) and increases in CRF

Poster Session B
as a result of an aerobic exercise intervention positively influences brain
volume in older adults. However, the role of physical activity (PA) in this
relationship is not known. In the current study, we collected objective measures of sedentary behavior, light, and moderate-to-vigorous PA over 7
days with an accelerometer from 225 healthy but low active older adults
(age 60-80, 68 males, MMSE >26). We obtained cortical thickness measures
by processing anatomical T1 MRI images (3T Siemens) in Freesurfer. First,
age and cortical thickness were negatively related in multiple regions
(p<.001, uncorrected). Second, we confirmed previous volumetric findings
of a positive relationship between (sex-corrected) CRF and cortical thickness, which was independent of age effects in some frontal and temporal
regions. There was a positive association between moderate-to-vigorous
PA and thickness of the bilateral enthorinal cortex, and in other regions, a
negative association between sedentary time and cortical thickness (p<.01).
These preliminary results suggest that CRF and PA may differentially play
a role in age-related cortical thinning and will be followed by assessment of
cortical thickness change as a result of exercise, dance, and nutritional interventions, and the impact of these brain changes on cognitive performance.

B106
IN VIVO EVIDENCE FOR LONG-TERM POTENTIATION IN OLDER
ADULTS Fabio Porto1, Anne Fox1, Erich Tusch1, Farzaneh Sorond2, Abdul
Mohammed3, Kirk Daffner1; 1Division of Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 2Division of Stroke
and Cerebrovascular disease, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 3Department of Psychology, Linnaeus University. — Long-term poten-

tiation (LTP) is a process by which synaptic strength is augmented. It is
believed to serve as a critical mechanism underlying learning, memory and
neuroplasticity. In vitro work on LTP has been done on hippocampal slices
using high frequency stimulation. However, it has been difficult to demonstrate LTP in vivo. Recently, LTP was reported in young adults by measuring visual evoked potentials (VEPs) before and after tetanic visual stimulation (TVS). The current study investigated whether LTP in the visual
pathway persists in older subjects. Seventeen healthy adults, 65 years
and older, were recruited from the community. Subjects had a mean age
of 77.4, mean MMSE of 29.1, and demonstrated normal visual acuity and
performance on neuropsychological tests. 1Hz checkerboard stimulation,
presented randomly to the right or left visual hemi-field, was followed by
two minutes of 9Hz stimulation (TVS) to one hemi-field. After two minutes
of rest, 1Hz stimulation was repeated. The N1 component was measured
at occipital electrode sites in the hemisphere contralateral to tetanic stimulation. We found that the amplitude of the N1 component was larger after
TVS than before TVS [-6.6 (6.5) μV vs. -5.7 (6.0) μV], p = 0.023, indicating a
reliable increase in N1 amplitude in response to TVS. Our results demonstrate that high frequency visual stimulation can enhance the N1 response
in cognitively normal older adults, suggesting that LTP in visual pathways
may continue into late life. Future studies should determine if this marker
of neural plasticity is affected by age and neurodegenerative disease.

B107
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIONS DURING LETTER PERCEPTION
REFLECT EXPERIENCE WITH HAND-PRINTING INDIVIDUAL LETTERS Sophia Vinci-booher1, Laura Engelhardt1,2, Thomas James1, Karin James1;
1
Indiana University, 2University of Texas at Austin — The neural substrates of
letter processing typically include the left fusiform gyrus (LFG), left precentral gyrus (LPrG), left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG), and parietal cortex.
In children, these regions support letter perception only after they have
learned to hand-print letters (James, 2010, 2012, 2013). When adults handprint individual letters or passively view letters, the LFG engages alongside LPrG and LIFG (James & Gauthier, 2006), suggesting that mature letter
perception is supported by a neural link among perceptual and motor processing areas that is related to experience hand-printing individual letters.
Here, we investigated this potential neural connectivity using generalized
psychophysiological interactions analysis (McLaren et al., 2012). We used
the LFG as a seed region and determined regions that were functionally
connected to it when 4-6 year-old children viewed letters and shapes
during fMRI scanning after learning them through three different visuospatial motor training tasks: printing, tracing, or typing. Only after printing practice (compared to typing) with letters were functional connections
established between LFG and LPrG. Only after printing practice with let-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

83

Poster Session B
ters (compared to shapes) were functional connections established between
LFG and LIFG. Any type of visuospatial motor experience with letters
promoted functional connections between LFG and the right intraparietal
sulcus and inferior parietal lobe of the parietal cortex. Therefore, the results
indicate that the different neural substrates of letter processing in the adult
may reflect different aspects of experience with hand-printing individual
letters.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
B108
TO BE PRECISE, THE DETAILS DON’T MATTER: ON PREDICTIVE
PROCESSING, PRECISION, AND LEVEL OF DETAIL OF PREDICTIONS Johan Kwisthout1, Harold Bekkering1, Iris van Rooij1; 1Radboud University — Many theoretical and empirical contributions to the Predictive Pro-

cessing framework emphasize the important role of precision modulation
within the framework. The weighting of prediction errors according to
the precision of the predictions that generated them is believed to capture
phenomena as diverse as contextual influences, planning, off-line simulation, and attention; deficits in the mechanism are suggested to account for
impairments such as autism and schizophrenia. Importantly, the precision
of a prediction is not to be mistaken for the level of detail with which a
prediction is made. The distinction between precision (or uncertainty)
and level of detail (or selectivity) of predictions, however, only becomes
manifest when the Predictive Processing framework is fleshed out in structural (graphical) models that allow for the modeling of higher cognition,
such as Theory of Mind, social interaction, and action understanding. We
show how precision and level of detail interact in Predictive Processing;
in particular, we propose that lowering the level of detail can be a suitable
mechanism to lower prediction errors by actually increasing the precision
of the prediction; this comes at the price, however, of lowering the amount
of information that can be gained by correct predictions. We identify the
question how the brain optimizes the trade-off between predictions with
high precision and predictions with high information gain as one of the
crucial theoretical open issues for Predictive Processing.

B109
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN STRIATAL GRAY AND WHITE MATTER
DENSITIES AND BODY MASS IN TYPICALLY DEVELOPING ADOLESCENTS James T. Kennedy1, Paul F. Collins1, Monica Luciana1; 1University of Minnesota — Previous research has linked obesity to differences in

brain structure and function. Structural differences have been found in the
putamen, cerebellum, and prefrontal cortex. While the structural differences in obesity have been investigated in adults, there is little research on
children or adolescents. In this study, 137 typically-developing children,
adolescents, and young adults (ages 9.3 to 19.7 years; n=68 female) participated in a longitudinal study of adolescent brain and behavioral development. Structural brain imaging was acquired on a Siemens 3T Tim Trio with
a T-1 weighted scan. Body mass index (BMI) was indexed through measures of height and weight. Data were preprocessed using SPM12. Wholebrain analysis of gray and white matter volumes was implemented through
SPM 12’s voxel-based morphometry module. Regions were identified that
showed associations with gray and white matter volumes and BMI percentiles (5.2 to 99.6th), controlling for age and gender. Using a clusterwise
FWE < .05, reduced gray matter volume was found with increasing BMI in
one extensive cluster (2222 voxels) extending to the left and right caudate,
the left putamen, and left anterior cingulate. Reduced white matter volume
was found bilaterally in two clusters (left hemisphere 1469 voxels, right
974), both lateral to the caudate. As the caudate is involved in reward evaluation, reduced gray and white matter volumes in this region may reflect
links between atypical eating behaviors that underlie obesity and altered
reward processing that varies with degree of adiposity. The observation of
such associations before adulthood suggests potential targets for intervention during development.

84

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

B110
IS HYPERICUM PERFORATUM A FAVORABLE THERAPEUTIC
MODALITY FOR THE TREATMENT OF DIABETES INDUCED COGNITIVE DISORDERS? Yusuf Ozturk1, Ozgur Devrim Can1, Umide Demir-Ozkay1;
1
Anadolu University, Faculty of Pharmacy, Departments of Pharmacology, Eskisehir, Turkey — St.-John’s Wort is a well-known antidepressant plant which

has been used as both therapeutic drug and OTC product. It seems to be
quite effective in the treatment of mild-to-moderate depression, as reported
in various controlled clinical trials. In addition, St.-John’s Wort has been
reported to be used in folkloric medicine for the cure of diabetes mellitus.
We have quite recently reported that extracts of this plant normalize blood
glucose levels and metabolic parameters in streptozotocin-diabetic rats (1).
Additionally, administration of this extract improves emotional and cognitive disorders (2) occurring in connection to diabetes. Incidences of cognitive disorders have been reported to be high in diabetes. Especially, vascular pathologies observed frequently in diabetic patients have been reported
to be related with cognitive dysfunctions, dementia and even with Alzheimer disease. Further, clinical management of these cognitive disorders is
a dilemma in diabetic patients. There are only a few number of cognitive
enhancers and their effectiveness or side effect profile in diabetic patients
have not been evaluated, yet. Hence, St.-John’s Wort, as a drug, having
both of the antihyperglycemic and cognitive enhancer effects seem as an
appropriate cure for the diabetic patients having cognitive disorders. Further, implications are discussed on the basis of literature data. (1) Can ÖD,
Öztürk Y, Öztürk N, Sagratini G, Ricciutelli M, Vittori S, Maggi F. Fitoterapia 82:576, 2011. (2) Can ÖD, Öztürk Y,Ozkay UD Planta Med 77:1970, 2011.

B111
POST-STROKE CORTICAL REORGANIZATION SUBSEQUENT TO
SOMATOSENSORY LESION Jared Medina1, Olufunsho Faseyitan2, H.
Branch Coslett2; 1University of Delaware, 2University of Pennsylvania — For corti-

cal reorganization to occur, there are two necessary components: sufficient
neural substrate for reorganization and intact pathways from the periphery
to undamaged tissue. In work with animal models, it has been proposed
that large lesions result in post-stroke reorganization in the intact hemisphere, whereas smaller lesions results in perilesional reorganization. We
examined an individual with a large left hemisphere lesion that encompassed most of left primary somatosensory cortex (S1), extending to posterior parietal cortex but sparing contralesional motor cortex and thalamus.
Presented with a battery of tests to assess somatosensory processing, he
demonstrated a clear impairment in tasks involving touch and proprioception on the contralesional limb, including tactile localization, finger identification, and localization of hand landmarks and arm position without
vision. Although he had increased sensory thresholds on his contralesional
hand compared to his ipsilesional hand, he could still detect contralesional
tactile stimuli of moderate intensity. Given the extensive damage to left
S1, cortical reorganization likely occurred to represent contralesional touch.
To examine the location of this remapped representation, we presented
the individual with tactile stimulation (2 Hz brush stimulus on the dorsal
surface of each hand) using a blocked fMRI design. For ipsilesional stimulation, we found activation in the intact, right somatosensory cortex. For
contralesional stimulation, we found a cluster of activation in right motor
cortex, demonstrating that this neighboring region was sufficient for reorganization. We discuss these and related findings with regards to potential
mechanisms and pathways for plasticity after stroke.

B112
HAMMERING DOWN THE PERFECT AMOUNT OF INHIBITION
FOR TIME PERCEPTION ACCURACY Kristina Hernandez1, Christopher
Thomas2, Keisha Woodall2, Alyssa Spurling2, Julie Matsen2, Stephanie SimonDack2; 1Oregon Health & Science University, 2Ball State University — Attentional

mechanisms are important for temporal accuracy, specifically the role of
neural inhibition on attention. Time perception accuracy at the millisecond range is crucial for everyday activities (e.g. communication, typing,
sensory perception). However, it is unclear how low levels vs. high levels
of neural inhibition impact time perception task performance. Time perception deficiency is characteristic of many clinical disorders, including
ADHD, language disorders, and dementia (Grondin, 2010). The present
study investigated temporal processing accuracy at the millisecond range

2015 Annual Meeting
in a non-clinical population. Participant ages ranged from 18-23 (M=20.53,
SD=1.38). Participants completed a duration discrimination task and the
Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale. A Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient was computed to assess the relationship between temporal
processing accuracy and scores on the ADHD scale. Performance on the
duration discrimination task and scores on the ADHD Scale were positively
correlated, r=0.332, N=33, p=0.059. Although the literature suggests that
individuals diagnosed with ADHD have temporal processing deficits, our
current research suggests a less clear-cut relationship between lowered cortical inhibition and temporal processing; there may be a certain level of
neural disinhibition that is beneficial to temporal processing, with too little
or too much leading to decreased accuracy in a non-clinical sample. Future
studies should focus on creating a large profile for the relationship between
neural inhibition and time perception, as well as a examining the underlying neural activity associated with temporal processing tasks. The present
study adds to our understanding of temporal processing mechanisms and
how differing amounts of inhibition impact time perception.

B113
RECRUITMENT OF THE ACTION OBSERVATION NETWORK IN
CHRONIC STROKE PARTICIPANTS WITH MILD TO MODERATE
LOWER EXTREMITY IMPAIRMENTS Panthea Heydari1, Kathleen Garrison2,3, Carolee Winstein1,3, Hanna Damasio1, Nerses Sanossian1,5, Sook-Lei
Liew6,7, Lisa Aziz-Zadeh1,4; 1University of Southern California, 2Yale University
School of Medicine, 3USC Division of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, 4USC
Division of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, 5Keck School of
Medicine of USC, 6National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
7
National Institute of Health — The Action Observation Network (AON), comprising the inferior frontal gyrus, ventral premotor, and posterior parietal
cortices, is active both when performing an action and observing others
performing the same action. Previously, our group found that individuals
with stroke-related upper extremity paresis demonstrate AON activation
in perilesional tissue, anterior to the canonical AON. Here, we explore if
there exists similar patterns for the lower extremity(LE). We recruited 8
individuals with chronic stroke and right LE impairments (Fugl-Meyer
LE mean=23.4/34, range 13-34) and 13 nondisabled matched controls to
observe, execute, and imitate LE movements during an fMRI scan. A conjunction analysis for action observation and execution for each effector as
compared to the control condition (a moving dot) was performed. Preliminary analyses indicate that stroke participants demonstrate activity bilaterally in the AON, including the inferior frontal gyrus and posterior parietal cortex, during action observation of both limbs. Mentalizing regions,
such as medial prefrontal cortex, are also recruited to process observation
of right foot actions (corresponding to the affected side). The nondisabled
group showed less activity in all regions compared to the stroke group,
inline with previous suggestions that the AON is more attuned to hand/
mouth actions than foot/leg actions in nondisabled individuals. Our data
indicates the AON may be engaged for the LE in individuals after stroke, as
use of this effector becomes more salient. This data may have implications
for rehabilitation of the LE post-stroke. Engaging this system may enhance
recovery post-stroke through priming of motor networks for execution via
observation.

B114
INFLUENCE OF ILLUSORY KINESTHESIA BY VIBRATORY TENDON
STIMULATION ON ACUTE PAIN AFTER SURGERY. Ryota Imai1,2,
Michihiro Osumi1, Shu Morioka1; 1Department of Neurorehabilitation, Graduate
School of Health Science, Kio University, 2Department of Rehabilitation, Kawachi General Hospital — Postoperative acute pain, pain-related anxiety and
catastrophizing lead to chronicity of pain and exacerbation of disability.
Our objective was to study the effects of inducing illusion of motion by
tendon vibration on sensory and emotional aspects of pain and range of
motion (ROM) of the affected joint. As part of a quasi-randomized controlled trial, 20 patients were assigned to the group with illusory movements (10 patients) in which their tendon was vibrated, or the control group
(10 patients) in which their tendon was not vibrated. In both groups, pain
(Visual Analog Scale; VAS), pain catastrophizing scale (PCS) and hospital
anxiety and depression scale (HADS), and ROM were assessed before and
after the intervention. The intervention was performed on seven consecu-

Poster Session B
tive days from postoperative day 1. Evaluation was performed at 7 days, 1
month and 2 months after the surgery. On two-way ANOVA, a significant
interaction among VAS scores for resting and movement pain, ROM, PCS
score for rumination, and HADS score for anxiety was recognized in both
the illusory kinesthesia and control groups (p < 0.05). We confirmed that
pain, ROM and the emotional aspect of pain improve after inducing illusion of motion by tendon vibration from the postoperative day. This clinical
study was performed to develop a method to prevent the occurrence of
chronic pain.

B115
AUTOMATIC MOTOR ACTIVATION ON THE BASIS OF SPATIAL
WORDS: A TMS STUDY Carsten Bundt1, Lara Bardi1, Elger Abrahamse1,
Marcel Brass1, Wim Notebaert1; 1University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium — Vari-

ous cognitive paradigms suggest an intimate link between perception and
action. The theory of embodied cognition conceptualizes this link theoretically. However, behavioral, electrophysiological and hemodynamic methods that have been used to investigate this relation might not be ideally
suited to directly demonstrate motor activation on the basis of perceptual information. Here, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has been
applied to directly probe the automatic activation of effectors in response to
semantic, task-irrelevant stimuli (i.e., the words ‘LEFT’ and ‘RIGHT’). Specifically, two sorts of trials were employed: on half of the trials, participants
were asked to respond to the color of target stimuli with the left or right
first dorsal interossei (FDI). Crucially, on the remaining half of the trials,
irrelevant spatial words were presented and participants were explicitly
instructed not to respond to these stimuli. TMS was applied to the primary
motor cortex to probe corticospinal excitability, which was measured at
the left and right FDI via electromyography (EMG). Results revealed that
motor evoked potentials (MEPs) were larger when the task-irrelevant stimulus (e.g. ‘RIGHT’) spatially corresponded with the effector (i.e. right FDI;
caused by stimulating left motor cortex), compared to when it did not (e.g.
‘LEFT’ and right FDI). This finding suggests an automatic lateral motor
activation on the basis of spatial words. Results are discussed in the context
of the embodied cognition theory and spatial compatibility effects. In a follow-up experiment, we test whether participants can exert control over this
‘automatic’ motor activation.

B116
DOPAMINE IS NECESSARY FOR REWARD-RELATED INCIDENTAL
LEARNING IMPROVEMENTS: EVIDENCE FROM PATIENTS WITH
PARKINSON’S DISEASE. Michael Freedberg1, Jonathan Schacherer1,
Kuan-Hua Chen1,2, Kumar Narayanan1,2, Ergun Uc1,2, Eliot Hazeltine1; 1The University of Iowa, 2University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics — Midbrain dopamine
neurons respond to both the presence of an unexpected reward and the
absence of an expected reward (Schultz, 1998). This dopamine reward-prediction signal has been inferred to be involved in various forms of learning including incentive learning and instrumental learning (Wachter et
al., 2009; Frank et al., 2004). However, recently it has been demonstrated
that rewards can be used to bolster incidental learning, even when participants demonstrate little to no awareness of which associations were
rewarded (Freedberg et al., in prep). The primary pathology in Parkinson’s
disease (PD) is the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain
that project to brain regions important for motor function, cognition, and
behavior. Here, we examine the role of dopamine in these reward-related
improvements by comparing performance and learning of patients with
PD, who are not demented and live independently, to age-matched comparisons. Participants performed a single-session experiment in which they
were asked to respond to pairs of faces in which half the pairs were linked
to a monetary reward. Immediately following training of the rewarded and
unrewarded combinations participants performed a transfer block where
they were asked to perform the same pairs without rewards. The data indicate that patients with PD showed significantly less reward-related incidental learning improvements compared to age-matched comparisons (F(1,
10) = 9.794, p < 0.05). These results show learning deficits of patients with
PD in acquiring rewarded information and support the role of dopaminergic transmission in rewarded incidental learning.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

85

Poster Session B

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
B117
CONTEXTUAL PROCESSING MODULATES HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL PERCEPTUAL SELECTION Elise Piazza1, Karen
Wong1, Michael Silver1; 1University of California, Berkeley — The right hemisphere processes low spatial frequencies (SFs) more efficiently than the left
hemisphere, which preferentially processes high SFs. We employed binocular rivalry to determine how these hemispheric differences in spatial
frequency processing influence visual perceptual selection. Participants
viewed a pair of rivalrous orthogonal gratings with different SFs, presented
either to the left or right of central fixation, and they continuously reported
which grating they perceived. At the onset of the rivalry pair, the low SF
grating was perceived more often when presented in the left hemifield
(right hemisphere) than in the right hemifield (left hemisphere), whereas
the high SF grating showed the opposite pattern of results. In a subsequent
experiment, we found that this hemispheric asymmetry is based on relative, rather than absolute, frequency processing. For example, a medium SF
grating, when rivaling with a high SF grating, was more likely to be perceptually selected when the rivalry pair was presented in the left, compared to
the right, visual hemifield. However, this same medium SF grating, when it
was paired in rivalry with a low SF grating, was more likely to be perceptually selected in the right, compared to the left, visual hemifield. Thus, the
visual system’s classification of a given SF as “low” or “high” (and therefore, which hemisphere preferentially processes that SF) depends on the
other SFs that are present in the environment at any given time, demonstrating an influence of top-down, contextual processing on hemispheric
differences in visual perceptual selection and conscious representations of
space.

B118
STATISTICALLY-INDUCED PREDICTABILITY OF THE CATEGORY
AND/OR LOCATION OF VISUAL STIMULI RESULTS IN WIDESPREAD ACTIVITY REDUCTION IN PARTIALLY OVERLAPPING
BRAIN REGIONS. Ben Davis1, Magda Altman1, David Melcher1,2, Uri Hasson1,2;
1

Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Italy., 2Department of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, University of Trento, Italy. — Regular-

ities in the environment license predictions that enable adaptive behavior.
However, it is unclear whether predictions about object category, location,
or both are mediated by overlapping systems. Using fMRI, we found that
viewing image series in which the upcoming image category, location or
both were predictable was associated with widespread reduction in BOLD
activity relative to a random condition where neither feature was predictable. For all three predictable conditions, savings were found in 4 clusters:
1) Left dACC/dmPFC, 2) bilateral putamen caudate and thalamus, 3) right
PCG, and 4) left primary visual cortex. In addition, category regularities
reduced metabolic demand in the ventral visual stream and semantic areas
of lateral temporal cortex while location regularities decreased activation in
a dorsal fronto-parietal cluster long implicated in the endogenous control
of spatial attention. These findings confirm and expand a role for dACC/
dmPFC and striatum in monitoring uncertainty in the environment, and are
consistent with Bayesian models of perceptual inference in which increased
predictability results in decreased computational demand when expected
and observed stimulus features converge. Our findings are also consistent
with an account based on anticipatory suppression, where cortical areas not
predicted to process an upcoming stimulus are down regulated. Finally,
the effects we observe are more widespread and further upstream in the
cortical hierarchy than previously reported.

B120
SCENE CATEGORIZATION: THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE EARLY
Manoj Kumar1, Yanqi Zhang1, Diane M. Beck1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1Univeristy
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign — Humans are extraordinarily quick at pro-

cessing natural scenes. Furthermore, good exemplars of natural scene
categories are not only categorized more easily but are also more readily
detected than bad exemplars. However, it remains unclear when and how
this good exemplar advantage arises. To address this question, we measured event-related potentials (ERPs) while participants viewed (and made

86

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
a delayed judgment about) good and bad exemplars of six scene categories:
beaches, city streets, forests, highways, mountains and offices. Good and
bad exemplars first evoked differential ERPs 250 to 350ms after onset, with
bad exemplars producing greater frontal negativity than good exemplars.
This effect is consistent with the N3 complex, previously associated with
global structure in an image. The results thus indicate that structural processing is easier for good than for bad exemplars. Good exemplars then
elicited a larger late positive complex (LPC) response, likely reflecting more
confident judgments for these items. Overall, the results indicate that the
good exemplar advantage may not only extend to eased cognitive processing, but also to perceptual processing, having its roots in higher order
visual processing and possible feedback to lower level processing areas.

B121
ATTENTIONAL SCOPE MODULATES BINDING WITHOUT CONSCIOUS AWARENESS Sol Z. Sun1,2, Julia Rybkina1, Brittany Danishevsky1,
Jonathan S. Cant2, Susanne Ferber1,3; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Toronto
Scarborough, 3Rotman Research Center at Baycrest — Most current theories of

consciousness propose that binding of multiple sensory inputs is not possible without awareness. Visual attention is another process implicated in
binding multiple visual features. However, few studies have examined the
separate contributions of attention and awareness to visual binding, due to
methodological difficulties in teasing apart these interrelated processes. We
examined the influence of attention on integration of faces without awareness using continuous flash suppression (CFS). Observers were presented
with high-contrast arrays of flashing circles to one eye and a face to the
other eye. The face is initially suppressed from consciousness, but eventually breaks from suppression. Prior to this task, we manipulated observers
to adopt either a global or local scope of attention using Navon letters (large
letters composed of small letters). Past studies demonstrated a global scope
of attention facilitates holistic face perception, thus we predicted that faces
would break from suppression more quickly under a global scope, relative to a local scope. Results from two experiments support this hypothesis,
which suggests that attention can operate without awareness to influence
unconscious holistic face perception. Additionally, we did not find these
scope differences in a non-rivalrous face detection task, nor when the faces
were replaced with houses in an otherwise identical CFS task. This suggests
that our findings cannot be accounted for by differences in detection thresholds, and that they are likely specific to face stimuli. Overall, our results
suggest that attention can operate without conscious awareness to modulate the binding of multiple visual features.

B122
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF PUPILLARY DYNAMICS AND COGNITIVE EFFORT Joshua Elkins1, Gahangir Hossain1, Yoshida Ken1; 1Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis — The pupillary response has been
used to measure mental workload because of its sensitivity to stimuli and
high resolution. The goal of this study is to understand the interconnections
between the visual pathway, auditory pathway, and the pupillary response
relative to cognitive effort for a mental task presented visually or through
audio. A multinomial processing tree was used to disentangle and measure separate cognitive processes, with the final response category being
a change in pupil diameter. This model was fitted to previous test data
related to the pupillary response when presented a mental multiplication
task. The parameters linking the response categories are compared between
three different multiplication task difficulties (easy, medium, and hard). A
further experiment was performed to compare the connections between the
visual and semantic neural pathways. The relationship between the neural
pathway and subjects learning predisposition was determined. This predisposition or bias was quantified by the results of an index of learning
styles (ILS) questionnaire. The parameters of the multinomial processing
tree were related to the ILS score. For the preliminary analysis, the magnitudes of the parameter values involved in the neural pathway were positively correlated with cognitive task difficulty. Without loss of generality,
the magnitudes of the parameter values are greater in the visual pathway
for subjects with an ILS score that indicates a sensing learning style. As a
result, a parsimonious model of the specific neural pathway that involves
the pupillary response to cognitive effort could be constructed.

2015 Annual Meeting

B123
PROCESSING FACES AND FACIAL EXPRESSIONS OF EMOTICON:
AN ERP STUDY Taejin Park1; 1Chonnam National University — Emoticon faces

have been widely used for expressing a person’s feeling or mood. This
study examined neural mechanisms of facial processing and facial expression processing of emoticon compared to those of human faces. Pictures
of emoticon faces and human faces expressing anger or neutral emotion
were presented in mixed mode (mixed context) or each in separate block
(single context) along with pictures of houses. All stimuli had oval-shaped
contours with two gaps, and 33 participants had to decide which of the
gaps was located higher. ERPs were recorded from 40 scalp electrodes and
early ERP components (P1, N170) were measured at inferior occipito-temporal sites. Amplitudes of N170 showed neither facial expression effect nor
difference between emoticon faces and human faces both in single context and mixed context. N170 amplitudes of faces (both of emoticon and
human) were larger than those of houses. Amplitudes of P1 also showed
no facial expression effect but showed differences between emoticon and
human face both in single context and mixed context. The positivity of P1
was larger to human faces than to emoticon faces and houses, and made no
difference between emoticon faces and houses. These findings suggest that
facial processing of emoticon and human faces might be distinguished at
early visual processing stage (reflected by P1), but also might be undistinguishable at very next processing stage (reflected by N170).

B124
FAMILIAR FACE DETECTION IN 180MS Matteo Visconti di Oleggio Castello1, M. Ida Gobbini1,2; 1Dartmouth College, 2University of Bologna — The visual

system is tuned for rapid detection of faces, with the fastest choice saccade
to a face at 100ms (Crouzet, Kirchner & Thorpe 2010). During everyday
interactions, however, we mostly look at faces of individuals we know.
Familiar faces have a more robust representation than do unfamiliar faces,
and are detected faster in the absence of awareness and with reduced attentional resources (Gobbini et al., 2013). We asked whether personally familiar faces are also detected faster in a saccadic-choice task than are unknown
faces. Subjects made correct and reliable saccades to familiar faces when
unfamiliar faces were distractors at 180ms, 30 to 70ms earlier than the earliest evoked potential modulated by familiarity (Schweinberger, Huddy &
Burton, 2004; Caharel, Ramon, Rossion, 2014). By contrast, subjects were
slower and less accurate when asked to make a saccade to unfamiliar faces
with familiar faces as distractors. We propose that detectors of diagnostic
facial features for familiar faces develop in visual cortices through learning
and allow rapid detection that precedes explicit recognition of identity.

B125
LOST IN 3-D-SPACE: IMPAIRED BINOCULAR FUSION IN A CASE
WITH VISUAL DEPTH PERCEPTION LOSS AFTER RIGHT OCCIPITAL
PARIETAL LESION Anna Katharina Schaadt1, Brandt Stephan2, Kraft Antje2,
Kerkhoff Georg1; 1Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany, 2Charité Berlin,
Germany — The complete loss of binocular depth perception (“Flat Vision”),

first described by Holmes and Horrax (1919), occurs mostly after bilateral
posterior-parietal lesions. Patients are unable to perceive visual depth any
longer; 3-D visual scenes appear like flat 2-D pictures. All visuomotor
activities (reaching, grasping, taking stairs) are impaired. Surprisingly, the
precise functional/neuroanatomical bases of “Flat Vision” are still obscure.
We studied a unique patient (EH) with a large right-sided occipito-parietal
hemorrhage showing a complete loss of visual depth perception for several
months post-stroke. EH could well describe simultaneously multiple visual
objects in a topographical scenery - hence did not show simultanagnosia but at the same time was completely unable to estimate their distance from
him. In every 3-D visual scene, objects appeared equidistant to him. EH
showed bilateral lower, homonymous field loss and a severely impaired
binocular convergent fusion, but preserved stereopsis and unimpaired eye
functions (visual acuity, accommodation, contrast sensitivity). Repetitive
dichoptic training resulted in a stepwise and finally complete recovery of
binocular fusion (p < .05, d = 1,4). Most interestingly, subjective depth perception improved in a “far-to-near-space”, gradient-like manner. In parallel, objective visual depth judgments also improved up to a normal level,
whereas stereopsis remained unchanged. This case shows that impaired
fusion is involved in the genesis of “Flat Vision” and shows a hither to

Poster Session B
unreported plasticity of the lesioned visual brain to regain 3-D-space perception. Furthermore, our results provide new insights into the complex
interplay of basic binocular (dys-)functions and higher-order visual space
perception.

B126
REDUCED ACCURACY OF TIME ESTIMATION IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS Savanna Sablich1, Yukari Takarae1; 1UT Southwestern
Medical Center — Differences in time estimation in individuals with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) have yielded findings of both increased and
decreased accuracy, and the extent to which this time estimation ability is
impacted in ASD remains equivocal. We examined time estimation in short
and long stimulus durations to potentially differentiate function of frontocerebellar and frontostriatal circuitries, both of which have been implicated
in ASD. Time estimation accuracy was assessed in seven individuals with
ASD and eight typically developing controls (TD) matched on age (12-32
years), gender, and full scale IQ. Participant’s time estimation was examined by requiring participants to reproduce the duration of a previously
perceived visual stimulus through depression of a mouse key. Durations of
the presented stimuli were either in subseconds or over seconds and were
randomly assigned to trials. Proportional error in reproducing the stimulus
timing was calculated, then its average and standard deviation were used
to examine accuracy and variability in time estimation respectively across
groups and conditions. Participants with ASD produced overall less accurate estimations than typically developing controls. The group difference,
however, was due to individuals with ASD showing drastic overestimation
and greater variability in short duration reproduction compared to controls, while their performance for longer duration stimuli remained very
similar to the control group. Specific impairments in reproducing subseconds time durations are consistent with involvement of frontocerebellar
circuitries. An additional implication in the detection of these abnormalities
may be linked to an inflexibility in processing changes of stimulus duration
when they are randomly presented.

THINKING: Development & aging
B127
FRONTAL NAA CONCENTRATIONS PREDICT GLOBAL COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN OLDER ADULTS Adam Woods1, Eric Porges1, Andrew
O’Shea1, Vaughn Bryant1, Ashley Harris2, Richard Edden2, Ronald Cohen1; 1University of Florida, 2Johns Hopkins University — The neurometabolite N-Acetyl

aspartic acid (NAA) plays an important role in modulating oxidative stress
in the brain. NAA concentration decreases in disorders causing neuronal
loss or axonal degradation. For example, NAA concentrations decrease following structural brain changes associated with normal aging. In general,
frontal cortices are thought to undergo the most prominent structural and
functional changes with age. Furthermore, these changes are associated
with a broad pattern of cognitive decline in older adults. NAA concentrations, as measured by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS),
may serve as a neuroimaging biomarker of cognitive aging. We hypothesized that age-related changes in frontal, but not posterior NAA concentrations would predict global cognitive function in a population of older
adults. Fifty-one older adults (mean age±SD = 72.6±8.8, range = 52-92 years,
mean education±SD = 15.9±2.7, range = 12-20 years) underwent the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) and MEGA-PRESS 1H-MRS in medial
frontal versus posterior cingulate cortices (PCC; voxel size =3cm3). Frontal
NAA concentrations decreased with age in medial frontal (t=-4.2, p<.001,
partial r=-.52), but not PCC regions (t=-.44, p=.66, partial r=-.06). Frontal
NAA concentrations were associated with MoCA scores (t=2.6, p=.01, partial r=.36), while PCC concentrations were not (t=-.05, p=.96, partial r=-.008).
Frontal NAA decreased with age and was associated with decreased global
cognitive function. These data provide initial evidence supporting 1H-MRS
measures of NAA in frontal cortices as a neuroimaging biomarker of cognitive aging. Future research will be needed to investigate the selectivity,
specificity, and malleability of this marker.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

87

Poster Session B

B128
THE DEVELOPMENTAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CEREBELLAR GREY MATTER AND COGNITION IN A PEDIATRIC POPULATION Dorothea M. Moore1, Anila M. D’Mello1, Lauren M. McGrath1, Catherine
J. Stoodley1; 1American University — There is growing evidence that the cer-

ebellum is involved in cognition. Cerebellar volume is related to general
intelligence in adult and pediatric populations. Cerebellar structural and
functional differences are reported in developmental disorders, and early
cerebellar damage negatively impacts later cognitive outcomes, emphasizing the potential importance of the cerebellum during development. Previous studies have investigated the relationship between cognitive subdomains and cerebellar grey matter (GM) in adults, but no study has looked
at this relationship in typically-developing children. Structural T1 MRI
scans and cognitive measures of 110 individuals aged 8-17 were obtained
from the Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition, and Genetics (PING) Study.
The correlations between cerebellar GM and measures of language, processing speed, working memory, and executive function were examined
using whole-brain voxel-based morphometric multiple regression analysis. Covariates included total intracranial volume, gender, age, age2, and
site. Higher scores on cognitive measures were associated with increased
GM in the posterior cerebellum: language scores correlated with GM in
left lobule VI, bilateral Crus II/VII/VIIIA, and midline VIIIA/VIIIB/IX/X;
working memory performance with right Crus II/VIIB; and executive function scores with lobules VIIB/VIIIA bilaterally. These cerebellar regions are
active during cognitive tasks and form circuits with dorsal attention and
frontoparietal networks. The age x score interactions for working memory
and processing speed indicate that these relationships differ across development. These results suggest that, as in adults, cerebellar GM is associated
with cognitive task performance in a pediatric population. These findings
provide further evidence for the involvement of the cerebellum in cognition
and cognitive development.

B129
DISTINCT NEURAL CIRCUITRY UNDERLYING NUMERICAL DEVELOPMENT IN 4- TO 6-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN. Alyssa Kersey1, Jessica
Cantlon1; 1University of Rochester — Numerical representations are hypoth-

esized to be integrated with representations from other visuospatial
domains, such as length or surface area. However, it is unclear whether
or not different quantitative representations rely on overlapping neural
mechanisms, if these mechanisms develop at similar rates, and how the
development of these neural systems relates to cognition. Here we test how
the development of numerical cognition relates to the neural processing
of different ordered, continuous, quantifiable properties (number, brightness, and area). Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
an adaptation paradigm, we measured changes in brain activity in children
(4- to 6- years) in response to visual arrays that varied from standard arrays
in the number, cumulative area, and brightness of elements. We found that
an area in the right intraparietal sulcus (IPS), which showed a decreasing
neural response during adaptation, also showed an effect of numerical distance when the stimuli suddenly changed in value – the IPS responded
more strongly to large compared to small changes in the number of items.
The number-sensitive region of the IPS did not show any significant relation to changes in area or brightness, suggesting that numerical processing
is separable from other quantifiable dimensions in the developing brain.
We measured children’s numerical discrimination abilities using behavioral tasks outside of the scanner. Children’s numerical sensitivity predicted their neural responses to changes in numerical values independently
of age. This suggests that neural activity in the IPS underlies the development of numerical processing systems in early childhood.

B130
MATHEMATICAL SKILLS OF COLLEGE STUDENTS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH RAPID ACCESS TO A MENTAL NUMBER LINE AND
PREFRONTAL ACTIVATION Keri Weed1, Laura Swain1; 1University of South
Carolina Aiken — Proficiency in mathematical reasoning has been related to
the establishment of a mental number line (MNL), or a cognitive representation of numerosity (Rusconi et al., 2009). Although evidence points
to the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) as the site of the MNL the prefrontal cortex
may also be involved (Ansari, 2008; Libertus et al., 2013). Some evidence

88

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
suggests that college students who have difficulty with math may have
formed a distorted mental number line as children (Izard & Dehaene, 2008;
Schneider & Siegler, 2010). The purpose of the current research was to
examine relationships between mathematical reasoning, MNL representation, and prefrontal brain activation. Fifteen college students completed: a
standardized assessment of math skills, a ruler estimation task designed
to measure the MNL, and a series of magnitude judgments that required
determining whether the quantity of two simultaneously presented dot
arrays was the same or different. Prefrontal brain activation was measured
using fNIR technology during the magnitude judgment task. Regression
analyses revealed that 63% of the variance in math scores was associated
with reaction time during ruler estimations (b = .57, p = .01) and with peak
deoxygenated blood volume during magnitude estimations (b = .68, p <
.01). Results confirm that mathematical skills of college students may be
related to the ability to quickly access a MNL as well as greater activation
of the prefrontal cortex. Implications suggest that repair of distorted mental
number lines may contribute to improved mathematical reasoning of some
college students.

THINKING: Problem solving
B131
FRONTAL THETA SYNCHRONIZATION INCREASES AS A FUNCTION OF THE AMOUNT OF INTERMEDIARY MOVES DURING
PLANNING. Steven R. Green1, Taylor M. Hurst1, Sharlene D. Newman1; 1Indiana
University — In problem solving, it can be difficult to measure the cognitive

processes involved in formulating a plan. Take for example elaboration,
the set of processes that occur during planning which identifies, evaluates,
and maintains moves which are eventually incorporated into the solution.
One approach to measuring these processes is through frequency analysis, which has been used to identify synchronization increases in the theta
band during working memory tasks. The current study sought to measure
elaboration during planning by manipulating the amount of intermediary
moves in problems and observes changes in the frontal theta synchronization. Results confirmed that parametric changes in the amount of intermediary moves resulted in linear increase in frontal theta synchronization. A
secondary analysis also revealed that the amount of theta burst – defined
as transitory periods of high theta synchronization during planning – predicted performance for that problem. However, the relationship between
the amount of theta burst and performance was mediated by motivation
and intermediary moves, such that when solving problems with several
intermediary moves, the low motivated group benefited by more theta
bursts while the high motivated group was impaired by them. Given the
unique nature of intermediary moves, these results suggest that changes in
frontal theta during planning may be reflecting the maintenance of moves
in working memory. Furthermore, frontal theta may serve as an effective
method for measuring elaboration during problem solving, but the meaning of frontal theta can vary by motivated state, so care must be taken when
using this measure.

B132
BUILDING AN INTEGRATED REPRESENTATION OF QUANTITY:
INCREASED SIMILARITY OF BRAIN RESPONSES FOLLOWING
NUMBER SENSE TRAINING Emma Adair1, Miriam Rosenberg-Lee1, Vinod
Menon1; 1Stanford University — Can a training targeted at strengthening the
mapping between symbols and their quantities create a more integrated
representation of numerical information? Here we investigate the neural
correlates of number sense training on thirty 2nd and 3rd grade typically
developing children. Children finished a 4-week one-on-one number sense
training program focused on building magnitude representations for symbolic quantities. Training was bracketed by functional magnetic resonance
imaging, where children completed two tasks involving magnitude comparisons of Dots and Numbers that were either Near (8 vs. 9) or Far (3 vs.
8) apart. Prior to training, the Dot task produced a neural distance effect
(NDE) – more activation for Near relative to Far problems – in multiple
frontal, visual, and parietal regions including the intra-parietal sulcus (IPS),
while no regions showed an NDE during the Numbers task. For the Dots
task, training reduced the regions showing NDE to core brain areas implicated in numerical cognition, including the bilateral IPS. In contrast, for

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session B

Numbers, training induced an NDE in the left superior parietal lobule and
lingual gyrus. A direct comparison confirmed that brain responses for the
two tasks became more alike after training. Further, a whole-brain representational similarity analysis revealed increases in similarity in the left IPS
and right lingual gyrus. These results suggest training number sense can
contribute to the maturation of a common format for quantity representations.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

89

Poster Session C
ATTENTION: Multisensory
C1
ANGRY FACES REDUCE SENSITIVITY FOR AUDITORY-VISUAL
TEMPORAL ASYNCHRONY L. Jacob Zweig1, David Brang1,2, Satoru Suzuki1,
Marcia Grabowecky1; 1Northwestern University, 2University of Chicago — Percep-

tion of a multisensory event, such as a person speaking, relies on binding
information from different sensory modalities into a unitary percept. A
temporal window of integration for multisensory events allows flexibility to account for latency differences arising from both variable physical
transmission rates through the environment and neural transmission rates
within the brain (Shelton, 2010). Previous research has shown that the
width of the temporal window is subject to influences of factors including
attention, spatial disparity, and stimulus complexity (e.g., Spence & Parise,
2010). The extent to which the temporal window of integration for speech
is influenced by emotion, however, remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that an angry expression reduces temporal sensitivity for detecting
auditory-visual asynchrony in speech perception. Using the method of constant stimuli, a video of a person uttering syllables was presented to participants with varying delays between the auditory and visual streams. For
each auditory stream, the accompanying visual stream assumed a happy,
neutral, or angry facial expression. Participants made unspeeded temporal
order judgments indicating whether the auditory or visual stream occurred
first. Facial expression did not influence the point of subjective simultaneity, suggesting that expression either does not influence the perception of
speech onset or does so equally for the visual and auditory modalities. An
angry expression significantly increased the just noticeable difference, suggesting that an angry expression reduces sensitivity for detecting temporal
asynchronies between auditory and visual speech streams. This result provides evidence that emotion processing influences the perception of audiovisual synchrony.

C2
DIFFERENTIAL INFLUENCE OF ALPHA MODULATION IN TASK
RELEVANT AND TASK IRREVERENT REGIONS Rosanne van Diepen1,
Ali Mazaheri1; 1Department of Psychiatry, Academic Medical Center, University
of Amsterdam — The most predominant frequency of ongoing oscillatory

activity present in the EEG/MEG is 10 Hz and is commonly referred to as
the alpha rhythm. There has been a number of findings that functional inhibition of a sensory system not important for a given task is achieved by an
increase in alpha activity. The majority of studies have examined shifts of
attention (often spatial) within one modality. Switching attention between
modalities is hypothesized to be mediated by the same mechanism. In the
current study participants performed a cross-modal attention-task in which
visual and auditory targets were preceded by either modality informative
cues (i.e. informing the modality of the target) or a non-informative cue. We
employed a block-design where visual and auditory targets were presented
by themselves or simultaneously with a distractor in the other modality.
Comparing the post-cue alpha activity (10 Hz) between the informative
and non-informative cue trials revealed that preparation for a visual target
induced a decrease in alpha activity over posterior regions. This decrease
in alpha activity was correlated with faster visual discrimination times. In
contrast, preparation for an auditory target induced an increase in alpha
activity in posterior regions but only when the auditory targets were paired
with visual distractors. However, this increase in alpha activity did not correlate with faster auditory discrimination times but did with distractor cost.
These results taken together suggest a multi-faceted role of alpha activity
in cross-modal attention.

C3
DELTA PHASE COHERENCE IN INTEGRATING AUDIO-VISUAL
INFORMATION Takefumi Ohki1,2, Atsuko Gunji2,3, Yuichi Takei4, Hidetoshi
Takahashi2, Yuu Kaneko2, Yosuke Kita2, Naruhito Hironaga5, Shozo Tobimatsu5,
Masumi Inagaki2, Kazuo Hiraki1; 1The University of Tokyo, 2National Centre of

90

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Neurology and Psychiatry, 3Yokohama National University, 4Gunma University,
Kyushu University — Multisensory process is an ability to combine cues

5

from various modalities, and a basic feature of brain function (Ghazanfar
and Schroeder, 2006). As one hypothesis to explain such a neural state,
cross-frequency coupling (CFC) has been proposed (Senkowski et al., 2008).
Especially, it is reported that phase-phase CFC plays an important role in
audio-visual speech processing (Luo et al., 2010). To investigate this issue,
interpreting “the cocktail-party effect” in a broad sense, we designed an
audio-visual speech-matching task. Since it is widely known the motion of
mouth enhances speech processing even in a noisy environment (Golumbic
et al., 2013), in our task, two films were presented simultaneously, which
consisted of two different sentences spoken by the identical female person.
Furthermore, two conditions “Temporal Synchrony (TS)” vs. “Temporal
Asynchrony (TA)” were created. In TA, the motion of mouth doesn’t temporally coordinate with auditory stimuli (420 ms mismatch). We assume
that if phase-phase CFC would serve as an essential component in binding
audio-visual processing, a mismatch between auditory and visual stimuli
would interfere with not only binding process but also phase coherence.
Then, using imaginary coherence analysis (Nolte et al., 2004), we obtained
behavioral and magnetoencephalographic data (N=19; mean age 25.6 yrs),
which support our hypothesis; behavioral performance and delta (1-3Hz)
phase coherence in TS are significantly higher than TA. In conclusion, delta
phase coherence among occipital lobe and anterior temporal lobe, PFC and
motor area, we propose, contributes to a fundamental binding process for
temporally matching audio-visual speech.

C4
WHEN MULTIPLE MODALITIES REQUIRE ATTENTION, THETA
STEPS UP TO THE PLATE Arielle S. Keller1, Lisa Payne1, Robert Sekuler1;
1

Brandeis University — Although alpha oscillations are known to play a role
in suppressing distracting information from a single modality, the neural
mechanisms implicated when multiple modalities must be simultaneously attended are not known. To address this, we investigated the effects
of divided attention on the processing of auditory and visual temporal
sequences. Subjects performed an oddball task with auditory, visual, or
simultaneous audiovisual sequences in separate blocks, while the electroencephalogram was recorded using high-density scalp electrodes. During
a divided-attention audiovisual condition, an oddball (a rare and unusual
stimulus) could occur in either the auditory or the visual domain, requiring that attention be divided between modalities. Fronto-central theta band
(4-7 Hz) activity source-localized to the anterior cingulate was strongest in
this audiovisual condition. That activity appears to be a marker of either
divided attention or multisensory processing. Additionally, posterior alpha
activity, which has been found to be a marker of selective ignoring of visual
stimuli, was stronger during the auditory condition than the visual condition, suggesting that subjects suppressed visual processing in order to
attend to the auditory stimuli. These findings show that neural processes
marked by oscillations in alpha and theta frequency bands are important in
attending to and processing temporal sequences in the visual and auditory
domains. Given that the anterior cingulate plays a role in divided attention
(Corbetta et al., 1991) and theta-band activity is involved in multisensory
integration (Sakowitz et al., 2000), future studies should focus on differentiating possible roles of theta activity during multisensory divided attention.

C5
ACTIVATION OF VISUAL CORTEX BY SALIENT SOUNDS: AUTOMATIC? Pawel J. Matusz1,2, Micah M. Murray1,3,4; 1Vaudois University Hospital
Center and University of Lausanne, Switzerland, 2University of Oxford, 3Center
for Biomedical Imaging (CIBM) of Lausanne and Geneva, Switzerland, 4Vanderbilt University — Laterally-presented sounds activate contralateral extrastri-

ate visual cortices ~250ms post-sound onset, and they do so even when
completely task-irrelevant and spatially uninformative when preceding
subsequent targets. An auditory-evoked contralateral occipital positivity
(ACOP) has been argued to be an event-related potential correlate of this
“automatic” sound-driven activation of visual cortices that results from the

2015 Annual Meeting
orienting of spatial attention to the sound location. All previous experiments involved tasks where the spatial location of stimuli was relevant. We
tested whether variation in and thus implicit predictability of the location
of lateralized sounds modulates the cross-modal activation of visual cortices under conditions where there was no task. We addressed this with
a completely passive auditory paradigm following a 2x2 factorial design
while recording 128-channel EEG. The spatial position or pitch of sounds
was varied (80% vs. 20%) while the other factor was held equi-probable
across different blocks. Brain responses to identical acoustic information
were compared. Mean activity at 260-360ms across posterior electrodes
confirmed the presence of sound-induced contralateral occipital activity.
However, this activity was exclusively observed in contexts wherein sound
position was implicitly predictable (i.e. when sounds were more often presented to one location vs. contexts when sound position was equi-probable).
Distributed source modelling localized this effect to a network of calcarine,
fusiform, and superior temporal cortices. Thus, cross-modal activation of
visual cortices by sounds is critically dependent on the overarching spatial
context and cannot be regarded as completely automatic.

C6
A TRADE-OFF BETWEEN SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL BINDING IN
MULTISENSORY PERCEPTION. Raquel E. London1, Durk Talsma1; 1Ghent
University — To be integrated into a unified percept, multisensory stimuli
must be perceived as occurring simultaneously (Colonius & Diederich, 2004,
JOCN). We have some tolerance for asynchrony which results in a window
within which two stimuli are perceived as simultaneous. The width of this
temporal binding window (TBW) varies considerably between individuals
(Stone et al., 2001, RSPSB) and influences their susceptibility to audiovisual
illusions (Stevenson et al., 2012, JEP:HPP). An individual’s peak alpha frequency seems to be an important determinant of the width of their TBW
(Romei et al., 2014, IMRF meeting, Amsterdam), with higher frequencies
resulting in narrower TBW’s. In the spatial domain there is also evidence
that the width of a binding window influences integration of audiovisual stimuli. For example, the extent to which visual search is facilitated
by auditory stimuli (an effect known as “Pip & Pop” (Van der Burg et al.,
2008, JEP:HPP) is modulated by the width of the spatial binding window
(SBW) (Van der Burg et al., 2012, PLOS ONE). We present data exploring
the relationship between individual differences in the width of the TBW,
and the width of the SBW. Our data show that a narrow TBW is accompanied by a broad SBW, and vice versa, suggesting a trade-off between spatial
and temporal sensitivity. These differences are related to individual’s peak
alpha frequency. Our results imply that there is an intimate correspondence
between spatial and temporal characteristics of perception on both functional and structural levels.

ATTENTION: Spatial
C7
OBJECTS UNAMBIGUOUSLY SEGREGATED FROM THE BACKGROUND INVOLVES EARLIER SPATIAL SELECTION Ryuji Takeya1, Tetsuko Kasai1; 1Hokkaido University — When attention is directed to a part of an

object, the whole spatial regions that belong to the object is obligatorily activated (object-based attention-spreading). Several studies have shown that
this process is reflected in the posterior N1 component (150-200 ms poststimulus) of event-related potentials (ERPs). However, previous studies
generally used simple rectangles as objects, which may not necessarily be
clear “figures” against the background because they can also be interpreted
to be holes in two-dimensional display. The present study used modified
Kanizsa stimuli and examined object-based attention-spreading for objects
that were perceived in front (Experiment 1) and in back (Experiment 2) of
the surrounding. In the both experiments, the task was to covertly attend
to one hemifield and to detect infrequent shallower dents (targets) among
frequent dents (standards) at the attended hemifield, which appeared upon
connected or separated objects. In response to standards, the typical P1
(100-140 ms) and N1 (150-220 ms) attention effects at occipital-temporal
electrode sites (i.e., greater amplitudes for stimuli at attended locations
than for those at unattended locations) were observed. Importantly, an
attention-spreading effect was found as decreased P1 attention effect for
connected objects compared to separated objects only in Experiment 1. This

Poster Session C
suggests that object-based attentional selection occurs at earlier stages of
processing than previously indicated when objects are unambiguous figures in front of the background.

C8
CAN THE EXPLORATION OF LEFT SPACE BE INDUCED IMPLICITLY IN UNILATERAL NEGLECT? Murielle Wansard1, Paolo Bartolomeo2,
Valérie Vanderaspoilden3, Marie Geurten1, Thierry Meulemans1; 1Department of
Psychology, Behavior and Cognition, Neuropsychology Unit, University of Liège,
Belgium, 2INSERM-UPMC UMRS 1127, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière. Brain and Spine Institute, Paris, France, 3Service de
Revalidation Neurologique, CHU Brugmann, Bruxelles, Belgium — The purpose
of the present study was to explore the ability of neglect patients to detect
and exploit the predictive value of a cue to respond more quickly and accurately to targets on their contralesional side in a Posner spatial cueing task.
The majority of the cues (i.e. 80%) were invalid, indicating that the target
would appear on the opposite side, although patients were not informed
of this bias. Our results demonstrate that some neglect patients were able
to extract the cue’s predictability and use it to orient faster toward the left.
This cueing effect was present even in patients who were subsequently
unable to describe the predictive character of the cues, and thus was not
modulated by reportable awareness of the cue-target relation.

C9
LINKING VIRTUAL STREET CROSSING PERFORMANCE TO SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY AND CORTICAL THICKNESS IN A
HEALTHY AGING POPULATION Sarah Banducci1, Agnieszka Burzynska1,
James Crowell1, Hank Kaczmarski1, Edward McAuley1, Arthur Kramer1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign — Most daily tasks require the ability to

manage multiple simultaneous cognitive demands. However, age-related
decline in cognitive abilities translates into less independence in completing
everyday tasks for older adults. For activities such as crossing the street or
driving a car, the consequences of this deterioration are serious, e.g. greater
risk of injury or traffic accident. As little is known regarding the cognitive
and neural correlates of real world pedestrian behaviors, we investigated
the link between success in a complex 3D virtual street crossing task, computer-based spatial working memory accuracy, and age-related cortical
atrophy. Subjects were 203 adults age 60–80 years (M = 65.22, 130 female).
Spatial working memory accuracy positively predicted virtual street crossing success. Furthermore, preliminary analyses positively linked cortical
thickness to spatial working memory and street crossing performance in
brain regions that support decision making and cognitive control including the insula, posterior cingulate and the prefrontal cortex. These results
introduce the possibility of identifying older adults at high risk of traffic
accidents via neuropsychological and imaging measures while in a safe
laboratory setting.

C10
NATURAL SCENE RECOGNITION IN THE CHILDREN’S BRAIN Nicolas Poirel1,2, Grégory Simon1, Sonia Dollfus3,4, Olivier Houdé1,2, Carole Peyrin5;
LaPsyDÉ, UMR 8240, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes, Université de Caen,
France, 2Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, 3ISTS, UMR 6301, CNRS,
CEA, Caen, France, 4CHU de Caen, Service de Psychiatrie, Centre Esquirol, Caen,
France, 5LPNC, UMR 5105, CNRS, Université Pierre Mendès France, France —
1

Recent models of visual perception suggested that scene recognition is processed in terms of spatial frequencies: low spatial frequencies (LSF) rapidly
reach high-order cortical areas to allow initial scene recognition and high
spatial frequencies (HSF) subsequently carry fine details analysis. In the
present MRI study we studied for the first time in children the relationship
between the cortical thickness and behavioral performances to LSF and
HSF processes. Sixteen children (10 years old) were presented with natural
scenes and they had to indicate as rapidly and as accurately as possible for
each trial whether the scene was outdoor or indoor. Each scene was filtered
either in LSF or in HSF. Children were scanned with a 3-Tesla MRI scanner,
and mean cortical thickness values were extracted with Freesurfer software
according to the Destrieux Atlas. Regression analyses, which included
age as covariable, were computed to determine the degree of relationship
between the cortical thickness and behavioral performances to LSF and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

91

Poster Session C
HSF filtered scenes. The results indicated that children exhibited (1) faster
reaction times to LSFs associated to a decreased cortical thickness in higher
order cortical areas constituted of middle frontal, lateral orbital and insula
regions and (2) faster reaction times to HSFs associated to an increased cortical thickness in parietal and calcarine regions. These findings constitute
the first structural study that supports the hypothesis that both synaptic
pruning (i.e. decreased cortical thickness) and expansion mechanisms (i.e.
increased cortical thickness) co-occur to allow healthy children to develop
an efficient perception of the visual world.

C11
DIRECT CURRENT BRAIN STIMULATION INDUCES CHANGES IN
CORTICAL ACTIVATION MEDIATING VISUAL SEARCH: A CONCURRENT TDCS AND FMRI STUDY Brian Falcone1, Atsushi Wada2, Raja
Parasuraman1, Daniel Callan2; 1George Mason University, 2Center for Information
and Neural Networks (CiNet) — Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)

is a non-invasive technique that has been shown to enhance many different cognitive components by affecting cortical excitability changes in the
brain. Studies have shown improvements on a plethora of different cognitive components; however, generally only behavioral effects are recorded.
The purpose of this study was to investigate what effects tDCS has on brain
function during training on a complex unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
visual search simulation task. Functional magnetic resonance imaging
was used concurrently with tDCS stimulation in order to observe these
effects. Following a baseline task performance assessment, anodal stimulation (1mA) was applied over right posterior parietal cortex for 30 minutes
during training, followed by a post-training assessment. Participants were
randomly assigned into either an active or sham stimulation condition. The
active stimulation group received stimulation for the full 30 minute training duration and the sham stimulation group only received stimulation
for 30 seconds. Our results showed that behavioral performance was not
significantly different between stimulation groups after training. However,
imaging results revealed that brain activity that correlated with improved
performance for the active stimulation group was significantly different
from sham. These effects involved bilateral activation of pre-motor, motor
and somatosensory cortices. While the behavioral effects of tDCS seen in
other, more basic, visual attention tasks were not observed, our neuroimaging results shed some light on the neuro-modulatory effects tDCS has on
brain function that is mediating enhancement in learning and performance.

C12
IT’S TIME TO LOOK LEFT - LEFT HEMISPHERE INVOLVEMENT IN
CONTROLLED VISUAL SEARCH Krista Schendel1, Lynn C. Robertson1,2,
And U. Turken1; 1VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez, CA, USA,
2
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, USA — Visual

search for targets containing a conjunction of features requires controlled
attentional search across a visual display. Studies in patients with right
hemisphere damage (RHD) have demonstrated significant deficits in conjunction search performance despite relatively good detection of singleton
features. Neuroanatomical regions implicated in the control of such spatially directed attention have likewise included extensive right fronto-parietal regions as well as the right temporo-parietal junction. Here, we investigated visual conjunction search performance in a group of chronic, left
hemisphere damaged (LHD) stroke patients (n=34). Using an adaptive,
computerized conjunction search task, we detected a significant lateralized
impairment in the left hemisphere patients, compared to a healthy, agematched control group (n=14). High resolution, T1-weighted anatomical
MRI scans were then analyzed for 30 of the stroke patients. Of interest,
lesions within/near the left temporo-parietal junction (including the left
superior temporal gyrus and Heschl’s gyrus) were associated with the
magnitude of the lateralized deficit, suggesting that this region of the left
hemisphere is also related to spatially directed attention. These results corroborate other findings that impairments in visuospatial attention are not
unique to right hemisphere damage. Here we show that cortical lesions
within the left temporo-parietal junction also impact directional bias and/
or spatial precision when the deployment of serial attention search is
required.

92

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

C13
TRANSCRANIAL RANDOM NOISE STIMULATION ACCENTUATES
REWARD-DRIVEN PLASTICITY IN VISUAL CORTEX Martijn van Koningsbruggen1, Stefania Ficarella1, Clayton Hickey2, Lorella Battelli1,3; 1Center
for Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems@UniTn, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,
Rovereto, Italy, 2Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento, Trento,
Italy, 3Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation and Department
of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School —
Previous studies have shown that reward feedback in visual search causes
target features to become salient and attention-drawing, but the mechanisms underlying this function remain unclear. Here we use transcranial
random noise stimulation (tRNS) to demonstrate that this reflects plasticity
in visual cortex. Participants completed a feature-search reward-learning
task that involved the selection of a red or green coloured target presented
among distractors of various color. Each correct trial garnered feedback
where the magnitude of reward was determined by the color of the target.
During this task tRNS was applied either over a parietal-occipital area
(n=20, P07/8 electrode sites), a frontal area (n=20, F3/4 electrode sites),
or sham stimulation (n=20). In a subsequent test phase, during which no
tRNS was applied and no reward was available, subjects performed a different visual search task requiring selection of a unique shape presented
among colored distractors. Importantly, in some trials a single distractor had a color associated with either high-magnitude or low-magnitude
reward during the training task. Consistent with prior results, RTs in the
sham group increased when a reward-associated distractor was present at
test, demonstrating a non-strategic residual influence of reward. Relative
to the sham group, the occipital stimulation group showed a significant
increase in this interference. The frontal stimulation group did not differ
significantly from the sham group, demonstrating the spatial specificity of
stimulation. Plasticity in early parietal and occipital cortex thus contributes
to reward’s impact on visual selection and this can be accentuated by tRNS.

C14
PRISM ADAPTATION SPEEDS MOVEMENT INITIATION IN THE
DIRECTION OF THE AFTER EFFECT: IMPLICATIONS FOR PREMOTOR NEGLECT Christopher Striemer1,2,3, Carley Borza1,2; 1MacEwan University,
Edmonton, Alberta, 2University of Alberta, 3Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital —
Damage to the temporal-parietal cortex in the right hemisphere often leads
to spatial neglect – a disorder in which patients are unable to attend to
items on their contralesional (left) side. Neglect has been associated with
both attentional and premotor deficits. That is, in addition to having difficulty with attending to the left side, patients are often slower to initiate
leftward vs. rightward movements. Previous research has indicated that a
brief period of adaptation to rightward shifting prisms can reduce symptoms of neglect by adjusting the patient’s movements leftward, towards
the neglected field. Although prism adaptation (PA) has been shown to
reduce spatial attention deficits in patients with neglect, very little work
has examined the effects of PA on premotor symptoms. To examine this in
healthy individuals we used leftward shifting prisms to induce “neglectlike” behaviour by adjusting participant’s movements rightward, similar
to neglect patients prior to PA. Specifically, we examined the speed with
which participants initiated leftward and rightward reaches (without
visual feedback) prior to and following adaptation to either 17° leftward
(n=15) or 17° rightward (n=15) shifting prisms. Our results indicated that,
following PA, participants were faster to initiate reaches towards targets
in the direction opposite the prism shift (i.e., faster reaches toward right
targets following leftward PA and vice-versa). These results are consistent
with the idea that PA has larger effects on tasks that require a directional
motor response. In addition, these data indicate that PA may be useful for
treating premotor symptoms of neglect.

2015 Annual Meeting

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
C15
EFFECTS OF EMOTIONAL STATE ON PROCESSING CONCEPTUAL
MISMATCHES IN A PICTURE-SENTENCE MATCHING TASK Martine
Verhees1, Randi Goertz1, Constance Vissers2, Dorothee Chwilla1; 1Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Kentalis Academy, St. Michielsgestel, The Netherlands — It has been

shown that emotional state affects language processing at the sentence and
discourse level as reflected by modulations of N400 and P600. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether emotional state also affects the processing of conceptual mismatches. Different emotional states (happy vs.
sad) were induced via film clips. ERPs of 38 participants were recorded
in a picture-sentence matching task. The pictures showed spatial arrays
and were followed by a sentence that gave a description of the picture.
Picture-sentence pairs provided a match (‘O-The star stands in front of
the circle.’), an intra-dimensional mismatch (‘O-The star stands behind
the circle.’) or an extra-dimensional mismatch (‘O-The star stands above
the circle.’). The main results were as follows: The mood manipulation was
effective. The ERPs were not modulated by emotional state, suggesting that
the effect of mood does not generalize to the conceptual level. Nevertheless,
in a previous study an early negativity and a P600 effect were found for
both conceptual mismatches relative to the match condition (Vissers et al.,
2008). In the present study a P600 effect was only present for the extra-dimensional mismatch condition. Given that the mood manipulation was the
only difference between studies, we take the present results to indicate that
being in an emotional state does influence conceptual language processing.
In particular, we propose that people in an emotional state (be this positive
or negative) only detect conceptual mismatches when they are salient.

C16
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) CHANGES IN THE PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL OBJECTS AND BACKGROUNDS Katherine Mickley Steinmetz1, Grace Longanecker1, Jennifer Sellers1; 1Wofford College — Emotional scenes are often more likely to be remembered than neutral scenes.
However, this effect may be modulated by neural differences in the processing of positive as compared to negative objects, as well as foreground as
opposed to background scene elements. In order to investigate these effects
of valence and scene element, event-related potentials (ERPs) were measured during the processing of scenes that included either a positive, negative, or neutral object, placed on a neutral background. Later, participants
were probed for memory of objects and backgrounds separately, allowing
analyses both of the processing of scenes, as well as the memory for various scene components. Analyses revealed an effect of valence at frontal
electrodes, and an effect of arousal at central electrodes. At 400-500ms for
frontal recording sites, ERPs were more negative-going during the processing of positive as compared to negative and neutral scenes, while at central
recording sites, ERPs were more negative-going during the processing of
both positive and negative as compared to neutral scenes. In addition, at
central electrodes during an early epoch (200-300ms), waveforms elicited
by processing scenes in which the emotional scene component was later
remembered, but the background was forgotten, were more negative-going
as compared to instances where the entire scene was remembered. These
results indicate that early prioritization of emotional information may
influence the processing of different valences and the memory for different
types of scene elements.

C17
DISTINCT NEURAL ACTIVATION PATTERNS DURING COGNITIVE
CONTROL OF EMOTION IN EARLY PSYCHOSIS Stefania Ashby1, Laura
Tully1, Tyler Lesh1, Cameron Carter1, Tara Niendam1; 1University of California,
Davis — Dysfunctional activation in the cognitive control network for “cold”

cognitive control deficits has been associated with more severe disorganization symptoms and functional impairment in psychosis; however the study
of cognitive control of emotion in this population remains relatively unexplored. We examined differences in neural patterns of activation during
an emotion reappraisal task in individuals with recent onset of psychosis.

Poster Session C
We hypothesized that individuals with early psychosis (EP) would show
different patterns of activation within the fronto-limbic cognitive control
of emotion network during reappraisal of negative emotional stimuli compared to healthy controls (HC). Ten HC and ten EP participants from the
UC Davis Early Psychosis program completed emotion reappraisal of negative stimuli and self-ratings of negative emotional arousal during fMRI; a
neural network of cognitive emotion regulation, comprising eight a priori
regions of interest identified by Kohn et. al (2014), was selected for MultiVoxel Pattern Analysis. Preliminary results show, across subjects, classification was successful for active reappraisal vs. active viewing of negative
images (ACC=72.5%; p=.005) and active viewing of negative vs. active
viewing of neutral images (ACC=80%; p=.001), demonstrating that active
viewing and active reappraisal of negative stimuli differentially engage the
cognitive control of emotion network. Classification was trending toward
significance for HCs vs. EPs on active viewing (ACC=70%; p=.0510) but not
on active reappraisal of negative images (ACC=35%; p=.8510), indicating
that negative emotional stimuli activate this neural network differently for
EPs, but that EPs may be able to successfully engage cognitive control of
emotion following explicit reappraisal instruction.

C18
A HORSE OF MANY COLORS: EMOTION STROOP EFFECTS ARE
ENHANCED BY THE PRESENCE OF COGNITIVE CONFLICT Eric
Lorentz1, Marla Mickleborough1, Layla Gould1, Chelsea Ekstrand1, Ron Borowsky1;
University of Saskatchewan — The literature on affective and cognitive tasks

1

using fMRI points to a reciprocal relationship of activation in emotion and
cognitive processing that may be mediated by connections between the
ventral and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC; see Bush, Luu & Posner,
2000). We tested the link between emotion and cognition by employing both
pure and mixed lists of emotion-related words (e.g., anxious, unhappy) or
traditional Stroop words (e.g., blue, pink) in a colour-naming Stroop task,
with pure lists of neutral words (e.g., dial, spin). Consistent with previous
theories, emotion-related words and traditional Stroop words generated
longer RTs than their neutral counterparts in pure-list form. In addition,
mixed lists generated longer RTs and more interference for both emotion
and traditional Stroop stimuli compared to pure lists. These results indicate that list-level conflict resolution takes place when both affective and
traditional Stroop stimuli are present. Given recent reports of color-emotion Stroop effects (e.g., Sutton & Altarriba, 2008), we also investigated
color-emotion associations in the emotion Stroop task. Contrary to earlier
reports, however, we found evidence for congruent words taking longer
for color naming than incongruent words. Our findings indicate that the
emotion Stroop effect involves both affective and cognitive conflict. These
behavioral findings also provide a control comparison for a patient with
intractable depression undergoing fMRI assessment.

C19
IMPAIRED EARLY PROCESSING OF FEARFUL FACES IN HAZARDOUS DRINKERS: EVIDENCE FROM AN ERP STUDY Yi Jin1,
John Shing-Yu Chan1, Yuejia Luo2; 1State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, 2Institute of Affective and Social
Neuroscience, Shenzhen University — It was reported that people with alco-

hol dependence have impaired neurocognitive processing which is often
indexed by reduced amplitudes of P3 and early ERP components such as
P1/N170. However, there were few studies investigating whether people
with less severe drinking problems have the similar deficits. Thirty-five
male hazardous drinkers (score 8 on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test, AUDIT, mean age = 26.03±4.63) and 35 gender/age-matched
controls (mean age = 24.12±3.77) were recruited in the present study. They
were asked to memorize emotional (fearful/disgust/neutral) faces with
two levels of memory load (1 face vs. 3 faces) in a working memory task
during which event-related potentials were recorded. Results showed that
while controls had larger P2 (150-200ms) amplitude to fearful faces, hazardous drinkers failed to show any P2 amplitude differences to 3 emotional
faces in this early processing stage. In contrast to previous studies reporting
P3 reduction in alcohol dependent participants, the current study did not
show reduced P3 in hazardous drinkers. Our results indicate that people
at risk developing alcohol dependence may have preserved capacity to

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

93

Poster Session C
mobilize mental resources toward task relevant stimuli, but their automatic
processing of threatening social signals may have been dampened, contributing to their early dysfunction in social life.

C20
FAMILIAR AND EMOTIONALLY INTENSE MUSIC ON AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY, EEG, AND PAIN MODULATION Christine R.
Jimenez1, Trevor C. J. Jackson1, Mark W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University
— Highly individual associations and memories from familiar music may

be aiding duration to cold stimulus (Mitchell & MacDonald, 2012). In this
experiment, participants selected ecologically familiar music, one song that
was emotionally intense in happiness and another in sadness. Forty-five
seconds directly prior to and during a cold-pressor task, participants listened to each song. EEG was collected at bands of interest that included
alpha (8-13 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz), and was recorded
from Fz, F3, F4, Cz, C3, C4, Pz, P3, and P4. Preliminary results suggest that
experiencing music-evoked autobiographical memories while listening to
sad music decreased time in the cold-pressor task. EEG measures showed
that for negative music, frontal-midline theta power increased during the
painful stimulus. This could indicate more attention to the music instead
of memory. Also, experiencing music-evoked autobiographical memories
while listening to happy music increased time in the cold-pressor task.
EEG measures showed for positive music, frontal-midline theta power
decreased during the painful stimulus. This could indicate more attention
to the memory instead of music. Emotional music often affects autobiographical memory and may be operating through underlying psychological mechanisms that may be memory-related.

C21
AMYGDALA VOLUME MODULATES THE EFFECT OF CORTISOL
ON MEMORY FOR POSITIVE STIMULI IN DEPRESSED WOMEN
Carlton P. Frost1, Stacey M. Schaefer1, Allison L. Jahn2, Erin C. Walsh1, Tory A.
Eisenlohr-Moul3, Richard J. Davidson1, Heather C. Abercrombie1; 1University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 2Clement J. Zablocki VA Medical Center, 3Duke University —
It is well-established that the stress hormone cortisol alters memory formation in response to emotional stimuli and events. There is also evidence that
cortisol function is dysregulated in depression. The current study sought
to elucidate factors that modulate cortisol’s effect on emotional memory
formation using structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In a repeated-measures design, 18 unmedicated depressed and 40 healthy individuals
were administered fifteen mg oral hydrocortisone (i.e., cortisol) or placebo
(order counterbalanced and double-blind) 1 hour prior to encoding of emotional and neutral words during MRI scans. Free recall for presented words
was measured 4-6 days later, and volumes for subcortical structures were
extracted from T1 images using Freesurfer. Among depressed women only,
cortisol administration significantly decreased memory for words with
positive valence relative to placebo (p < .05); however, greater bilateral
amygdala volume strongly predicted increased cortisol-driven memory for
positive words, ameliorating this effect (p < .01). In fact, among depressed
women with larger amygdalae, cortisol has no effect on positive memory (p
= 0.85). This finding suggests that, although cortisol and amygdala volume
are both implicated in the pathogenesis of depression, a larger amygdala
may actually protect positive memory formation from the effects of elevated cortisol.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
C22
TWO-PERSON HYPERCLASSIFICATION REVEALS SHARED
NEURAL SIGNATURES FOR PHYSICAL AND VICARIOUS PAIN
PERCEPTION. Fanny Lachat1, Dmitry Smirnov1, Tomi Peltola1, Juha Lahnakoski1, Olli-Pekka Koistinen1, Enrico Glerean1, Aki Vehtari1, Riitta Hari2,3, Mikko
Sams1,4, Lauri Nummenmaa1,2,3,4; 1Department of Biomedical Engineering and
Computational Science (BECS), School of Science, Aalto University, Finland,
2
Brain Research Unit, O.V. Lounasmaa Laboratory, 3Advanced Magnetic Imaging
Centre, Aalto NeuroImaging, Aalto University, FI-0076 Espoo, Finland, 4Turku PET
Centre, FI-20520 Turku, Finland — Seeing someone in pain may trigger both

94

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
sensory and affective components of pain in the observer. But to which
extent does the shared neural signature of physical and vicarious pain
allow prediction of another person’s somatovisceral state? We tested this
in a pseudo-hyperscanning setup. First, one ‘transmitter’ subject received
painful (needle pricks) and non-painful (makeup brush) stimuli to his
right hand and foot during 3T fMRI (five 20-s blocks of 24 stimuli in each).
The stimulations were videotaped, with closeups to the hand and foot,
and shown subsequently to 12 ‘receiver’ subjects during fMRI. Bayesian
canonical correlation analysis was applied to model shared information
between transmitter and receivers subjects, and the model was then used
for functional realigning of the brains. Pattern classifier (Bayesian logistic
regression) was trained on the transmitter’s data and tested with the receivers’ data in regions-of-interest derived from separate pain localizer scans
in each individual. The transmitter’s brain activity successfully predicted
the receiver’s brain activity (accuracy 54% vs. 25% chance level) in primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, anterior cingulate cortex and
insula. Our hyperclassification results demonstrate that the brain activity
associated with a person’s physical pain allows predicting another person’s
(receiver’s) vicarious pain, implying robustness of the shared brain circuitries.

C23
DECODING SOCIAL NETWORK POSITION FROM AUTOMATICALLY
ELICITED PATTERNS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY Carolyn Parkinson1, Adam M.
Kleinbaum2, Thalia Wheatley1; 1Dartmouth College, 2Tuck School of Business at
Dartmouth College — How we perceive and interact with others is influenced

by direct social ties, relationships between third parties (e.g., “friendsof-a-friend”), and topological characteristics of our social networks (e.g.,
cliques). Yet, little is known about how this information is processed in the
brain, or how it impacts cognition and behavior. We sought to test what
information about social network position is spontaneously encoded when
encountering familiar individuals, and the brain systems involved, by combining social network analysis with multivariate pattern analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging data. After reconstructing the social network of all students in a graduate program, a subset of these individuals
participated in a neuroimaging study where they viewed several of their
classmates’ faces. Several characteristics of others’ social network positions
(e.g., social distance from the perceiver; eigenvector centrality–the extent
to which an individual is well-connected to well-connected others; the
extent to which an individual bridges structural holes in the network) were
automatically encoded when seeing those individuals’ faces, and this information was carried in largely distinct brain regions. For example, social
distance could be decoded from activity patterns in a region of right inferior parietal cortex previously implicated in egocentric spatial and social
distance encoding, and eigenvector centrality was represented in brain
areas involved in perceptual/attentional and saliency processing, possibly
indicating differential attentional capture for high vs. low centrality individuals. These results demonstrate that multiple aspects of social network
position are automatically represented, and inform hypotheses about how
this information impacts subsequent mental processing and behavior.

C24
MEETING ONE’S MATCH? STEREOTYPE CONGRUENCY INFLUENCES CORTICAL PROCESSING OF MARGINALIZED GROUPS
Sierra P. Niblett1, Jordan M. Seliger1, Adam Fogarty1, Eric D. Splan2, Avi BenZeev1, Mark W. Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University, 2University of Delaware
— Electrophysiological research has demonstrated that stereotypes exert
an influence on face processing reflected in greater attentional allocation
(larger N1 amplitudes) toward Black male faces paired with positive stereotypes (Dickter & Gyurovski, 2012). Gender stereotypes have elicited
larger P3 amplitudes to occupation expectancy violations (Osterhout, Bersick, & McLaughlin, 1997). Notably, stereotypical associations for marginalized groups are often strong, such as the hostile Black man or the passive
woman (Hilton & von Hippel, 1996). Herein, the aim of the current study
was to examine cortical processing of marginalized group members in the
presence of congruent/incongruent stereotypic information. During a categorization task, participants were randomly assigned to view Black and
White male faces (race condition; n = 8 White participants) or White male
and female faces (gender condition; n = 14, 11 females) while electroencephalography was recorded at midline electrode sites. Faces were preceded

2015 Annual Meeting
by traits priming congruent stereotypes (e.g., “athletic” for Black males) or
incongruent stereotypes (e.g., “assertive” for females). Preliminary findings
revealed significantly larger N1 amplitudes (μV) for stereotype congruent
Black male faces (M = -5.55, SE = .99) compared to stereotype incongruent
Black male faces (M = -3.903, SE = 1.29). Additionally, a trend in larger
P3 amplitudes (μV) was observed at Pz for incongruent female faces (M =
16.22, SE = 1.56) compared to congruent female faces (M = 13.98, SE = 1.72).
Neither of these findings was present for White male faces. Our results suggest that stereotypes are more diagnostic for marginalized group members
during face processing.

C25
MALE FACIAL STIMULI EVOKE GREATER N170 AMPLITUDES IN
DIFFERENT CORTICAL REGIONS FOR EITHER FEMALE OR MALE
PARTICIPANTS William Krenzer1,2, Kristina Pfeifer2, Callan Lujan2, Avi BenZeev2, Mark Geisler2; 1DePaul University, 2San Francisco State University — Ito
and Urland (2005) state that social category cues, such as race and gender
can be easily ascertained from faces. One of the most utilized ERP components for facial processing is the N170 (Eimer, 2000). Our previous investigation showed that regardless of participant gender, male facial stimuli
evoke greater amplitudes in several ERP components, such as the N100,
P200 and N200 (Krenzer et al., 2014). Differences in N170 amplitudes have
been shown for in-group and out-group processing. One explanation for
these differences is that individuals have more exposure to their in-group
(Wiese, 2013). In the current study, we found increased N170 amplitudes to
male facial stimuli. Male participants (n = 10) had increased N170 amplitudes at the T5 electrode site when viewing male facial stimuli (t(9) = -2.071,
p < 0.05), suggesting that this region may be more responsive to in-group
processing. In addition females (n = 17) had increased N170 amplitudes at
the T6 electrode site when detecting male facial stimuli (t(16) = -2.153, p
< 0.05), suggesting a shift in cortical activation for out-group processing.
The T5 and T6 regions showed increased activity to male facial stimuli as
it applied to the gender of the participant. This suggests that males and
females may process male stimuli differently between hemispheres, further
research is needed to elucidate this relationship.

C26
LINKING SOMATIC STATES AND SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE
DURING THE PERCEPTION OF FACIAL AND VOCAL EXPRESSIONS
OF EMOTION Philip A. Kragel1, Kevin S. LaBar1; 1Duke University — Studies of
emotion perception have linked a distributed set of brain regions to the
recognition of emotion in facial, vocal, and body expressions. In particular,
lesions to somatosensory cortex in the right hemisphere have been shown
to impair recognition of facial and vocal emotional expressions. These
findings suggest that somatosensory cortex may represent components
of emotional states that occur when displaying such expressions, such as
a furrowed brow or gaping jaw, yet evidence directly linking somatosensory activation and subjective experience during emotion perception is
lacking. To address this issue, we conducted an fMRI study in which participants viewed facial and vocal expressions of emotion (fearful, angry,
sad, surprised, happy, and neutral) and made on-line ratings of their own
emotional state. Self-report data indicated that the expressions produced
moderately distinct subjective experiences, which often mirrored the emotion conveyed in the stimuli. Multivariate classification of neural activation
within a number of regions implicated in emotion recognition (i.e. posterior superior temporal sulcus, fusiform gyrus, postcentral gyrus in the right
hemisphere, amygdala, inferior frontal operculum, insula, and medial orbitofrontal cortex) revealed that somatosensory cortex and insula predicted
the emotional content of stimuli with highest levels of accuracy. Further,
classification accuracy in somatosensory cortex was found to increase as
subjects made more distinct experiential ratings. Together, these findings
provide novel evidence linking somatic states and subjective experience
during emotion perception, both supporting embodied accounts of emotion recognition and providing a potential mechanism for the spread of
emotional states between individuals during social interactions.

Poster Session C

C27
SEXUAL ORIENTATION IS ASSOCIATED WITH TEMPORAL DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY OF IN-GROUP
BIAS Maia T. Nguyen1, Stephanie Bastidas1, Robert Ross1, Lucy J. Troup1;
1
Colorado State University — Social biases have been demonstrated in many
domains, including race, age, and sexual orientation. Behavioral research
addressing sexual orientation identification has shown that individuals
perform better than chance at recognizing the sexual orientation of others.
Time processing for sexual orientation congruent and incongruent stimuli,
based on participant self-report, was examined. A Neuroscan EEG system
fitted with a 64-electrode cap was used to examine event-related potential P1, N170, P300, and LPP components in a sexual orientation identification/discrimination task. Undergraduates and young adults completed
questionnaires regarding their own sexual orientation and then reported
their best judgment on the sexual orientation for images of self-identified
homosexual and heterosexual individuals. Analyses compared homosexual and heterosexual participants’ event-related potentials to heterosexual and homosexual faces. A greater vertex positive potential (VPP) was
found for heterosexual individuals viewing heterosexual (in-group) stimuli
compared to homosexual (out-group) stimuli. The N170 was reduced at P8
(right parietal site) for homosexual individuals viewing heterosexual faces.
The late positive potential (LPP) was much smaller for heterosexual females
viewing homosexual faces. These findings suggest greater amplitudes for
congruent compared to incongruent stimuli based on sexual orientation for
the VPP, N170, and LPP. However, incongruent faces elicited greater P300
amplitudes at P3 and P4. Results suggest that face processing differs as a
function of own and other sexual orientation, providing a possible mechanism for group differences in sexual orientation identification previously
found. These findings are consistent with in-group studies and support an
expertise theory of face recognition.

C28
EMOTION PROCESSING DIFFERENCES IN CURRENT AND PAST
USERS OF CANNABIS Stephanie Bastidas1, Maia T Nguyen1, Jacob T
Braunwalder1, Jeremy Andrzejewski1, Jason S Nomi1, Lucy J Troup1; 1Colorado
State University — Cannabis abuse and addiction is associated with detri-

mental effects on cognition and behavior. Recent neuroimaging research
suggests that casual users present morphological differences in brain areas
associated with emotion processing; it is unclear whether these differences
are reflected in cognitive, behavioral, and functional measures. We examined event-related brain potentials (ERPs) in current and past cannabis
users and non-users during emotion processing. Electroencephalogram
was recorded while participants viewed images of male and female faces
depicting happy, angry, fearful, and neutral emotional expressions. Participants completed three tasks in which they identified the sex or the emotion for all faces, or empathized with the emotion depicted by each image
(implicit, explicit, and empathic conditions, respecitvely). Current and past
users presented differences in ERP components during emotion processing.
Specifically, users presented with decreased ERPs overall, but especially
in P1 amplitude over parietoccipital electrodes and to P3 amplitude over
parietal and frontal medial sites. This P3 attenuation in current users was
most noticeable during empathic processing, in which participants were
instructed to empathize with the emotion depicted as they would for a
close friend or relative. This data supports a relationship between cannabis
use and changes of affective systems in the brain. Further study will assess
a larger population of users that will allow us to examine in more detail
the relationship between levels of use and altered emotion processing as
measured by electrophysiological and behavioral measures.

C29
BRAIN AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDIATORS OF IMITATION:
SOCIOCULTURAL VERSUS PHYSICAL TRAITS Elizabeth Reynolds
Losin1,2, Choong-Wan Woo1, Anjali Krishnan1, Tor D. Wager1, Marco Iacoboni2,
Mirella Dapretto2; 1University of Colorado Boulder, 2University of California, Los
Angeles — The acquisition of cultural beliefs and practices is fundamental
to human existence, but the psychological and neural mechanisms underlying cultural acquisition are not well understood. Here we sought to
determine whether the physical or sociocultural characteristics of others

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

95

Poster Session C
are more influential during imitative learning, a critical component of cultural acquisition. While undergoing fMRI, 17 European American young
adults imitated models from three different racial groups performing
novel hand gestures. Participants learned that half the models shared their
political ideology and half did not, balanced across race. We found that
the models’ political ideology – a sociocultural characteristic devoid of any
physical correlates – was sufficient to influence imitative accuracy, and that
this effect was mediated by changes in feelings of similarity to the models.
Furthermore, brain regions included in both the mentalizing network (e.g.,
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex) and those previously associated with imitation (e.g., inferior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis) mediated the relationship
between the imitative models’ political ideologies and imitation accuracy.
Finally, comparing these results with a previous study without the political
ideology manipulation, knowledge of the models’ political ideology actually decreased the influence of race on feelings of similarity to the models,
imitation accuracy, and neural activity during imitation. These findings
strongly support the hypothesis that the sociocultural characteristics of the
models, rather than their physical (e.g., racial) characteristics, most influence the psychological and neural mechanisms underlying imitative biases
during cultural learning.

C30
VENTRAL MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX SUPPORTS A MULTIDIMENSIONAL CODE FOR SIMILARITY TO SELF Mark Thornton1, Jason
Mitchell1; 1Harvard University — One person can differ from another in an
almost infinite variety of ways. However, people make holistic judgments
of interpersonal similarity easily and naturally, and use similarity as a basis
for how to interact with others. How do perceivers integrate the vast array
of potential differences between self and other into a single representation
of similarity? One way their brains might accomplish this is through a multidimensional code: within a single brain region, neural subpopulations
would modulate activity in response to different dimensions of similarity.
The pattern of activity across the region would thus represent overall similarity, despite the heterogeneous responses of its subpopulations. To test
this hypothesis, in the present study participants underwent functional
magnetic resonance imaging while they imagined personally familiar
others in a number of scenarios. Using representational similarity analysis,
we decoded the perceived similarity to self of these targets from patterns of
neural activity within ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vMPFC). This result
is highly consistent with earlier research implicating vMPFC in the representation of similarity, making social inferences, and integrating information. Moreover, we observed similarity-encoding patterns within a portion
of vMPFC previously demonstrated to be involved in self-reference. The
effect remains robust even when controlling for a wide range of other social
variables. The presence of a multidimensional code was further supported
by the absence of parallel univariate effects and the results of cross-validated factor analysis. These findings support the hypothesis that similarity
is represented in a deeply multidimensional, rather than monolithic, way.

C31
IDIOSYNCRATIC BRAIN ACTIVATION PATTERNS WHILE VIEWING
COMPLEX SOCIAL SITUATIONS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH POOR
SOCIAL COMPREHENSION IN AUTISM Lisa Byrge1,3, Julien Dubois2,3, J.
Michael Tyszka2, Ralph Adolphs2, Daniel P. Kennedy1; 1Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 2California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 3these authors contributed equally — Prominent social deficits are at the core of the heteroge-

neous condition known as Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Attempts to
understand the neural bases of these deficits using conventional neuroimaging techniques have been largely restricted to presenting reduced-complexity, often static, stimuli and examining differences from neurotypicals
at the group level. Here we used a technique that allowed us to present
rich, semi-naturalistic stimuli and examine heterogeneity within the ASD
group: measuring inter-subject synchronization of BOLD-fMRI responses
(Hasson et al., 2004). Participants with ASD (N=17) and matched controls
(N=20) watched an episode from the television sitcom “The Office” (NBC)
in the MR scanner. Inter-subject correlations in the pattern of evoked activation were reduced within the ASD group (consistent with previous work;
Hasson et al., 2009; Salmi et al., 2013), but this effect was driven by five ASD
subjects with responses that were highly idiosyncratic relative to others and
highly unreliable upon repeated viewings. Brain responses of the remain-

96

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
ing ASD individuals were indistinguishable from those of controls using
several machine learning approaches. Atypical brain responses in the five
idiosyncratic ASD subjects were not explained by their neuropsychological
profile or by acquisition artifacts (including motion); however, these subjects showed specific impairments in understanding the social motivations
of characters in the video. Our findings highlight heterogeneity within the
ASD “group” (Brock, 2011), demonstrate the importance of ecologically
potent stimuli in identifying brain signatures of ASD, and establish the first
link between abnormal brain responses evoked by such stimuli and a specific impairment in social comprehension.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
C32
AGING OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS IS ASSOCIATED WITH THICKNESS OF REGIONAL PREFRONTAL AND PARIETAL CORTEX Elizabeth D. Reese1, Kristen M. Kennedy1, Asha K. Unni1, Karen M. Rodrigue1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Executive functioning exhibits significant decline

with increasing age across the lifespan. Previous investigations into the
neuroanatomical correlates of executive functioning have been largely limited to measures of prefrontal cortex volume and revealed relatively modest
age-related associations. In this study, we investigate the effects of age-related thinning in selected regional prefrontal and parietal cortices on executive function in a healthy lifespan sample (N=137, aged 20-93). Regional
thickness was measured in prefrontal and parietal association cortex parcels and was averaged across hemisphere. Executive function measures
from DKEFS Trails, Stroop, and verbal fluency and WCST assessments
were submitted to principal components analysis and revealed two factors:
verbal fluency and inhibition/task-switching. General linear models were
conducted using executive function construct as dependent variable and
age and regional cortical thickness as predictors. We found significant main
effects of both age and regional thickness on verbal fluency selectively in
the inferior frontal parsopercularis (Broca’s area) and superior and inferior
parietal lobules. For inhibition/task-switching, main effects of both age and
cortical thickness were evident in a broad range of areas, including superior
and middle frontal gyri, inferior frontal parsopercularis and parstriangularis, lateral and medial orbitofrontal, superior and inferior parietal, and
precuneus. Thus, in a healthy lifespan sample, for both aspects of executive function (verbal fluency, inhibition/task-switching) greater thickness
is predictive of better executive function performance beyond the aging
effects. Whereas verbal fluency may be associated with select language-related frontal and parietal regions, inhibition/task switching appears to be
dependent upon a wide network of frontal-parietal association cortices.

C33
MODULATION OF FUNCTIONAL ACTIVATION TO WORKING
MEMORY LOAD ACROSS THE ADULT LIFESPAN: FINDING THE
CRUNCH POINT Kristen M. Kennedy1, Asha K. Unni1, David A. Hoagey1, Karen
M. Rodrigue1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Working memory (WM) perfor-

mance decreases with age and as WM load increases, these deficits are magnified. fMRI studies in young adults suggest that brain activation increases
with increasing WM load. It is unclear how the aging brain responds to
this increased mental challenge. fMRI studies comparing older to younger
adults suggest modulation to increased WM load decreases with age, however a lifespan approach would allow investigation of when in the lifespan
and where in the brain these modulation differences occur. To examine this
we scanned 140 adults across the lifespan (20-93) during a digit n-back task.
We contrasted activation modulation from digits presented 2-back with
those presented 4-back in a factorial ANOVA in SPM with age as a four-level
categorical factor. Both age-related increases and decreases in modulation
were examined in paired comparisons: Young vs Middle-age, Middle-age
vs Old, Old vs Very Old. We found that in the transition from Young-Middle age, there was no decreased modulation, but increased modulation in
bilateral occipital, parietal and fusiform cortices. Middle-Old transition
revealed selective decreases in the left caudate and increased modulation
in bilateral superior temporal, right superior and left middle frontal cortices. Old-Very Old transition showed decreased modulation in frontal and

2015 Annual Meeting
parietal (precuneus, inferior parietal, middle and inferior frontal) cortices,
with increased modulation selective to left caudate. The overall pattern of
findings revealed modulation of activation to WM load increased progressively from Young-to-Middle-to-Old age, but then decreased sharply in the
Very Old, consistent with a Compensation-Related Utilization of Neural
Circuits Hypothesis (CRUNCH).

C34
HIGHER-ORDER COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS IN THE “VISUAL”
CORTEX OF CONGENITALLY BLIND ADULTS Marina Bedny1, Connor
Lane1, Shipra Kanjilia1; 1Johns Hopkins University — In adults distinct cortical
networks support vision, language and working memory. How do intrinsic constraints and experience drive this specialization? According to one
view, cortical areas are innately constrained to a single cognitive function.
Some cases of cross-modal plasticity are consistent with this hypothesis.
E.g. In blindness visual motion regions process auditory motion. Here we
report plasticity that breaks from this pattern. Nineteen congenitally blind
adults and seventeen sighted controls performed two tasks while undergoing fMRI. In Experiment 1 participants made same/different judgments for
pairs of math equations and pairs of sentences. Math equations were more
(double digit) or less (single digit) complex. In Experiment 2 participants
heard sentences and answered true/false questions about them. Sentences
were either more (contained syntactic movement) or less (no syntactic
movement) complex. In a control condition, participants judged sequences
of non-words. We found that in blind but not sighted individuals a subset
of occipital areas responds 1) more to language than math, 2) more to language than sequences of non-words and 3) more to syntactically complex
than syntactically simple sentences but 4) is insensitive to math complexity.
By contrast, a distinct set of occipital areas responds 1) more to math equations than sentences and 2) to complexity of both equations and sentences.
We conclude that in blind adults distinct occipital areas support linguistic
and non-linguistic working-memory functions. These results suggest that
“visual” cortical areas can support a wide range of cognitive functions,
including language and working memory.

C35
INTRINSIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF STRIATAL AND CORTICAL STRUCTURES IN MARIJUANA DEPENDENCE: A PROSPECTIVE STUDY OF ADOLESCENT ONSET COLLEGE-AGED USERS
Monica Luciana1, Paul F. Collins1, Jazmin Camchong1, Mary P. Becker1, Kelvin
O. Lim1; 1University of Minnesota — Background: Marijuana use (MJU) has

accelerated among youth in the United States and is associated with cognitive deficits such as lower-than-expected IQs, memory problems, and
executive dysfunction. Neuroimaging studies suggest deviations in cortical
white matter microstructure. MJU before age 17 is associated with greater
impairment. Most studies are cross-sectional case-control comparisons.
Until recently, examinations of functional connectivity have been lacking.
Methods: Self-reported daily marijuana users were prospectively assessed
relative to demographically-matched controls (n=74) using a combined
behavioral and neuroimaging protocol. Participants completed baseline
assessments and were retested after two years. MJUs initiated use before
age 17 and maintained heavy use over time. Resting state, diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI), and volumetric scans were collected on a 3T Siemens Tim
Trio scanner using standard procedures. Intrinsic functional connectivity
was measured by placing seeds in cognitive control regions (e.g., cingulate
cortex; dorsolateral PFC) as well as dorsal and ventral striatum. The neurobehavioral assessment included multiple executive function measures.
Results: Despite above average IQs, MJUs show deficits in verbal learning, memory, working memory, and reward-related decision-making. DTI
findings reveal several frontal regions where white matter microstructure
is distinct in its development. These distinctions are most pronounced after
3-4 years of chronic MJU. Intrinsic functional connectivity analyses reveal
group differences in connectivity between the ventral striatum and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex as well as between anterior cingulate and prefrontal regions. These findings are not attributable to alcohol use. Discussion:
Findings will be discussed in terms of marijuana’s effects on the developing
brain and impacts of legalization.

Poster Session C

C36
A NEURAL CORRELATE OF EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR IN EARLY
ADOLESCENCE Andrew Kayser1, Zdena Op de Macks2, Ronald Dahl2, Michael
Frank3; 1UC San Francisco, 2UC Berkeley, 3Brown University — The onset of adolescence is associated with in increase in the behavioral tendency to explore
and seek novel experiences. However, this increase in exploratory behavior
has rarely been quantified, and its neural correlates during the onset of adolescence remain unclear. Recently, work in adults has begun to characterize
individual variability in exploration, and to associate greater exploratory
tendencies with specific regions within the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex
(rlPFC). Here we take advantage of a recently developed task to assess
exploration, defined as the degree to which the relative uncertainty of
rewards directs responding toward less well-evaluated choices, in a group
of 62 girls examined near the onset of puberty (ages 11-13). Behaviorally,
this task divided our subjects into groups of explorers (N = 41) and non-explorers (N = 21). Notably, the degree of exploration was uncorrelated with
a measure of risk aversion. When seed regions of interest within the rlPFC
were used to interrogate resting state data, we identified a lateralized connection between the rlPFC and posterior putamen/insula whose strength
differentiated explorers from non-explorers. Based on Granger causality
analyses, the preponderant direction of influence may proceed from posterior to anterior, rather than vice versa. Together these data provide initial
evidence concerning the neural basis of exploratory tendencies emerging
in early adolescence.

C37
EFFECT OF REMOTE TBI ON CORTICAL THICKNESS, NEUROCOGNITIVE AND PSYCHOSOCIAL FUNCTIONING: EVIDENCE FROM
RETIRED SEMI-PROFESSIONAL AND PROFESSIONAL HOCKEY
PLAYERS Carrie Esopenko1, Melissa Pangelinan1, Aggie Bacopulos1, Nicola de
Souza1, Nivethika Jeyakumar1, Anthony R. McIntosh1,2, Stephen Strother1,2, Brian
Levine1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences, 2University of
Toronto — Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated with neurocognitive

changes that can result in cognitive impairment, and can elevate the risk
of developing dementia (Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and chronic traumatic
encephalopathy (CTE)), with even seemingly mild TBIs, or concussions,
in sport being linked to accelerated cognitive impairments during aging.
However, little is known about the relationship between remote mild
TBI and age-related brain changes. Given that many professional athletes
experience repetitive brain trauma during their athletic careers, these individuals provide an excellent model to assess the long-term effects these
injuries have on brain aging. Twenty-seven retired semi-professional and
professional male hockey players (e.g., National Hockey League Alumni)
and nineteen age-matched comparison subjects were assessed using a
comprehensive battery of neuropsychological, psychosocial, and computerized neurocognitive assessments, as well as high-resolution structural
magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI). Within alumni athletes, higher TBI
dose, a measure of TBI frequency and severity, was associated with greater
self-reported impairments in psychosocial function. Moreover, alumni athletes demonstrated greater age-related decreases in performance on tasks
assessing speeded processing, visuospatial abilities, and inhibitory control
than did comparison subjects. Finally, we found greater diffuse age-related
decreases in cortical thickness in the alumni than in comparison subjects,
and that the relationship between cortical thickness and neurocognitive
function was enhanced with age among the alumni relative to the comparison subjects. Together, these results suggest that sports-related TBI
may accelerate the aging processes in the brain, which result in changes in
behavioural function.

C38
FRONTAL GABA CONCENTRATIONS ARE RELATED TO GLOBAL
COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN AN AGING POPULATION. Eric C. Porges1,
Adam J. Woods1, Richard A.E. Edden2, Ashley D. Harris2, Ronald Cohen1; 1University of Florida, 2Johns Hopkins University — Cerebral concentrations of γ-Ami-

nobutyric acid (GABA), the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in CNS,
have been positively associated with performance in tasks requiring visual
attention regulation and sensory discrimination. Cerebral concentrations of
GABA, measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and global

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

97

Poster Session C
cognitive function have independently been demonstrated to decrease
with aging. To date, the relationship between GABA concentrations measured with MRS and global cognitive function have not been reported. To
explore this relationship, fifty-one older adult’s [mean age (±SD) = 72.6±8.8,
range = 52-92 years, mean education (±SD) = 15.9±2.7, range = 12-20 years]
GABA concentrations in frontal and posterior midline cerebral regions
were assessed with GABA–edited (MEGA-PRESS) 1H-MRS and quantified using GANNET software. These subjects were also assessed with the
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA). Using a GLM approach, there
was significant relationship between GABA and MOCA scores for both
frontal and posterior voxels. When age was controlled for in the model,
frontal GABA concentrations were positively related to MOCA scores (p
< .05). The relationship between frontal GABA concentrations and global
cognitive function, controlling for age, may inform biological mechanisms
underlying cognitive dysfunction as well as provide potential portals for
pharmacological remediation.

C39
AGE-RELATED DE-DIFFERENTIATION OF FUNCTIONAL BRAIN
NETWORKS AT REST IS ASSOCIATED WITH THE INSTABILITY OF
EXECUTIVE FUNCTION. Timothy B. Weng1, Chelsea N. Wong2, Agnieszka Z.
Burzynska2, Laura Chaddock-Heyman2, Gillian E. Cooke2, Jim M. Monti2, Edward
McCauley2, Arthur F. Kramer2, Michelle W. Voss1; 1The University of Iowa, 2The
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — The brain is organized into func-

tionally differentiated networks that support either internally-oriented or
externally-oriented cognitive processes. The differentiation between the
two classes of networks may facilitate the performance of executive functions (EF). Previous findings indicate that even in a resting state, greater
differentiation predicted better performance stability (i.e., intra-individual
variability) during a later attention-demanding task in young adults. However, it is unknown whether this property of network organization applies
to older individuals. We hypothesized that 1) aging would be associated
with reduced differentiation between internally-oriented and externally-oriented networks at rest, and 2) age-related network de-differentiation
would predict EF performance. We collected resting-state fMRI data from
a sample of older (N=236, age=64.9 years) and younger individuals (N=48,
age=21.9 years). We then extracted resting-state activity from the defaultmode network (DMN), a primary internally-oriented network, along with
several externally-oriented networks (executive control and dorsal attention networks). Next, we quantified the inter-network connectivity between
pairs of networks as a measure of network differentiation and evaluated
whether these indices predicted performance during an attention-demanding task. We found an age-related reduction of functional differentiation
between the DMN and externally-oriented networks that predicted greater
intra-individual variability in task performance. These results demonstrate
that the stability of EF performance is positively related to the differentiation between internally and externally-oriented networks. Consistent with
inhibition theories of cognitive aging, our results suggest that older adults
may be less able to filter internally-oriented processes during tasks that
demand externally-oriented attention, which may stem from age-related
reductions in network differentiation at rest.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
C40
UNCERTAINTY MONITORING AS A MECHANISM FOR FLEXIBLE
COGNITIVE CONTROL: NEW INSIGHTS FROM INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES George A. Buzzell1,2, Daniel M. Roberts1,2, Logan R. Cummings3,
John R. Fedota4, James C. Thompson1,2, Raja Parasuraman1,2, Craig G. McDonald1,2; 1George Mason University, 2Center of Excellence in Neuroergonomics,
Technology, and Cognition, 3University of Tampa, 4National Institute on Drug
Abuse — Goal-directed behavior requires that individuals monitor their performance over time and flexibly adapt response strategies when necessary.
For example, slowing down after errors is generally thought to reflect an
increased allocation of top-down control over behavior to prevent future
mistakes. We recently reported that uncertainty also serves as a signal for

98

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
the performance monitoring system to instantiate cognitive control, as
indexed by slowing on post-uncertain trials. Additionally, post-uncertainty
slowing was accompanied by increased activation within the medial frontal cortex (MFC). Here, we replicate this finding and explore how individual differences in post-uncertainty slowing are correlated with activation
of the performance monitoring and dorsal attention networks. fMRI was
acquired while participants performed a difficult visual discrimination
task and reported their certainty of stimulus identity on each trial. Analysis
of correct trials confirmed our previous finding that participants respond
slower following correct-unsure (relative to correct-sure) trials and that
uncertainty is associated with increased activity within MFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and insula. Whole-brain analysis further revealed
that these same regions were correlated with individual differences in the
magnitude of post-uncertainty slowing. Complimentary regions within
the dorsal attention network were also correlated with the magnitude of
post-uncertainty slowing. Together, these data provide additional support
that uncertainty can serve as a signal to engage control, leading to increased
attentional allocation.

C41
SOCIAL SIMON EFFECT: NO EVIDENCE OF ACTION CO-REPRESENTATION AT THE BRAIN LEVEL Karen Davranche1, Thierry Hasbroucq1,
Nicolas Rochet1, Laurence Carbonnell1, Franck Vidal1, Pascal Huguet1; 1Aix-Marseille Université et CNRS, France — While the Simon effect is typically obtained

when single participants perform a choice reaction time task, an analogous
effect—called the social simon effect or SSE—can emerge when performing a Go/Nogo task in co-action. Sebanz and collaborators proposed that
action co-representation, one of the prevalent notion to account the SSE,
brings about assimilating the coactor to one’s own body. When co-acting,
participants would behave as if they were choosing between alternative
responses albeit such a choice is objectively unnecessary. Here, we question
this account of the SSE through an electroencephalographic (EEG) study,
assuming that the activation/inhibition pattern record over M1s and the
N-40 can be taken as indices of motor processes and response decision,
respectively. If action co-representation is a viable interpretation of the SSE,
we reasoned, then the N-40 and the activation/inhibition pattern over M1s
should be present when the Go/No-Go task is performed in co-action and
should disappear when it is performed in isolation. Twenty eight participants performed: a joint Go/Nogo task and an individual Go/Nogo task.
Participants were asked to respond according to the color of the stimulus
whatever the location of the stimulus. The EEG signal, recorded for both
participants, revealed no sign of response decision (N-40) or change in
motor processes (activation/inhibition pattern), and so did not support the
action representation account of the SSE. Our reaction time data suggested
that the SSE can be assimilated to a basic social facilitation effect.

C42
BILINGUAL PROFICIENCY AND AGE OF ACQUISITION ARE INDEPENDENTLY RELATED TO NON-VERBAL COGNITIVE CONTROL:
EVIDENCE FROM AN FMRI STUDY Maya R. Greene1, Aurora I. RamosNuñez1, Kelly A. Vaughn1, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of Houston — Many

previous studies compare bilingual and monolingual cognitive control,
however few of these take into account individual differences within the
bilingual population. The current study sought to examine how individual
differences in bilingual language proficiency and age of second language
acquisition (AOA) are related to brain activity during a non-verbal cognitive control task. Spanish-English bilinguals (n=46) performed the Simon
task while in an fMRI scanner. Participants had to respond to the color of
circles, in neutral, congruent, and incongruent conditions. Multiple regression analyses of regions of interest were carried out on a priori selected
brain areas. AOA and proficiency were found to be differentially related
to brain activity in the incongruent condition only. AOA was positively
correlated with activity in the left inferior parietal lobe (IPL). Language
proficiency was negatively related to activity in the right anterior cingulate
(ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal (DLPFC) cortices. The results imply that
these language variables are related to activity in cognitive control areas
even in a non-verbal task. AOA seems to indicate training; greater experience with management of two languages (lower AOA) is related to less
activation during the incongruent condition--a graded bilingual advantage. Language proficiency appears to indicate that greater language skill

2015 Annual Meeting
is related to increased non-verbal cognitive control ability, suggesting a
relationship between verbal and non-verbal processing. The results of this
study highlight the need to address these individual differences that exist
in the bilingual population even in examinations of non-verbal processing.

C43
THE NEURAL BASES OF INHIBITION-INDUCED FORGETTING
Yu-Chin Chiu1, Tobias Egner1; 1Duke University — Response inhibition is consid-

ered a core executive function, but its relation to other cognitive processes
is not well-understood. We have recently shown that response inhibition
impairs memory encoding, with no-go cues being remembered more poorly
than go cues following a go/no-go task (Chiu & Egner, 2014, Psychol Sci).
We hypothesized that this inhibition-induced forgetting effect arises from
competition for a common attentional resource, whereby response inhibition saps attention away from stimulus encoding. Here, we used fMRI to
examine two neural predictions of this hypothesis - (a) brain regions associated with response inhibition should exhibit greater activation (reflecting greater resource demands) during encoding of subsequently forgotten
no-go cues than remembered ones, and (b) brain regions associated with
memory encoding should display less activation (indicative of sapped
resources) during encoding of subsequently forgotten no-go cues than
remembered ones . Participants categorized face stimuli by gender in a go/
no-go task and, following a short delay, performed a surprise recognition
memory test for those faces. Replicating previous behavioral findings, recognition memory (d’) was lower for no-go than for go stimuli. Crucially, the
fMRI data showed that activity in “no-go areas” (compared to “go areas”)
was larger for forgotten than for remembered no-go stimuli. Moreover,
activity in ventrolateral PFC predicted encoding success, but this region
was less active in forgotten than in remembered no-go trials. This seesaw
pattern of activity between response inhibition and memory encoding
regions supports the hypothesis that response inhibition temporarily saps
attentional resources away from memory encoding processes.

C44
CATCHING INHIBITORY PROCESSES DURING SPEECH PLANNING ON THE FLY Rhonda McClain1, Eleonora Rossi1, Judith F. Kroll1; 1Penn
State University — When bilinguals prepare to speak, words from both languages compete for selection. Inhibition of the dominant language (L1) has
been hypothesized to resolve cross-language competition. At the same time,
the two languages interact seamlessly during code-switching, suggesting
bilinguals recover from inhibition. Inhibitory processes during speech
planning have been hypothesized to be the source of bilingual cognitive
advantages. However, there is virtually no evidence that directly links
inhibition in bilingual speech to cognitive advantages. Additionally, little
is known about the developmental trajectory of these inhibitory processes.
Second (L2) language speakers who are not yet proficient, may have a particular need to inhibit the more dominant L1. We examined these issues
by using ERPs to catch inhibition on the fly. Monolinguals and L2 learners
completed a Go/No-go task in which pictures were initially named and
then later repeated as Go trials or No-go trials. L2 learners named pictures
in L1 after L2. Monolinguals named in L1 only. We predicted that if learners inhibit L1 as a consequence of speaking L2, there should be costs for Go
trials when they are required to name a picture in L1 that was previously
named in L2. Monolinguals demonstrated increased negativity in the N200
window (200-300 ms) for No-go trials. L2 learners generated a different pattern, with increasing negativity starting in the N200 window and persisting
throughout the epoch, for Go trials. The results suggest that when learners
plan speech in the L2, there are immediate and long lasting effects for cognitive control in the L1.

C45
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TRAIT AND SPONTANEOUS EMOTIONAL REGULATION STRATEGIES DURING STRESS AND
ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITY Cierra M. Keith1, David A.S. Kaufman1, Tony
W. Buchanan1; 1Saint Louis University — The error-related negativity (ERN) is
an event-related potential (ERP) thought to reflect error detection and conflict monitoring. Previous research has found that individuals with greater
negative affect tend to exhibit greater ERN amplitude. The ERN can also be
influenced by instructed emotion regulation strategies in response to stress.
However, the relationship between spontaneous emotion regulation strat-

Poster Session C
egies and error processing is poorly understood. In this study, 32 healthy
undergraduate males were randomly assigned to either perform the Trier
Social Stress Task (TSST) or a placebo TSST, followed by spontaneous and
trait level emotion regulation questionnaires, and a computerized Go-no
go task during which ERPs were measured. Heart rate and cortisol were
examined throughout the experiment, revealing significant physiological
effects of the TSST. In the stress group, spontaneous emotional suppression
was associated with enhanced ERN amplitude, while spontaneous emotional reappraisal was associated with reduced ERN. Greater endorsement
of trait level emotional suppression was also associated with reduced cortisol response during the TSST. These results support prior findings that
error processing is related to emotional regulation. Importantly, different
stress-related spontaneous emotional regulation strategies had divergent
associations with ERN amplitude. Spontaneous use of emotional suppression in the face of a stressor was associated with enhanced error detection.
Spontaneous emotional reappraisal had an opposite relationship with ERN,
but no associations with physiological stress. The general tendency to rely
on emotional suppression was associated with reduced cortisol response
to stress. These findings provide intriguing new evidence about the differences between spontaneous and trait level emotional regulation.

C46
NO EFFECT OF SELF-CONTROL EXERTION ON AMYGDALA REACTIVITY AND EMOTIONAL MEMORY Matthias Luethi1, Malte Friese2,
Clemens Schroeder1, Noemi Ribaut1, Peter Boesiger3, Roger Luechinger3,
Björn Rasch1,4; 1University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Saarland University, Germany, 3Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, Switzerland, 4University of
Fribourg,Switzerland — Emotional events are better remembered than neutral ones, mainly through the involvement of limbic brain areas such as
the amygdala. Emotional reactivity depends on self-regulatory processes,
which can become impaired by repeated use of self-control. In one study,
emotional reactivity in the amygdala was increased after a strenuous
self-control task, indicating that increased emotional responses may be
one consequence of exerting self-control (Wagner and Heatherton, 2012).
Here, we sought to replicate this finding and tested whether this increase in
emotional reactivity after exerting self-control leads to improved emotional
memory. Participants did or did not exert self-control before viewing neutral and emotional pictures while brain activity was recorded with fMRI.
In addition, participants rated their arousal and engaged in a memory task
of the pictures viewed 24 hours later. We expected better recall after the
exertion of self-control because increased emotional reactivity in the amygdala has been associated with better subsequent memory performance.
Results revealed increased amygdala activity, higher arousal ratings and
better recall performance in response to emotional as compared to neutral
pictures, as expected. However, exerting self-control had no influence on
any of these variables or on prefrontal functioning while viewing the pictures. This null finding occurred despite a strong self-control manipulation
using established tasks and despite employing a set of emotional pictures
that was successfully used repeatedly in previous memory research. We
conclude that increased amygdala reactivity in response to emotional cues
may not be a reliable consequence of self-control exertion.

C47
DOES SCRIPT SIMILARITY AFFECT EXECUTIVE FUNCTION? Jack
Darrow1, Chirag Dalibar1, Hunter Johnson1, Kenneth Paap1; 1San Francisco State
University — Does Script Similarity Affect Executive Function? Different

languages use different writing systems. Coderre and van Heuven (2014)
hypothesized that similar scripts generate more cross-lexical competition
requiring more inhibitory control and, consequently, an enhancement
of general executive functioning (EF). Three of their nine comparisons
showed significant advantages in global RT for the bilingual group having
the greatest script similarity. In contrast, Bialystok, Craik, Grady, Chau,
Ishii, Gunji, and Pantev (2005) and Linck, Hoshino, and Kroll (2008) each
reported one comparison showing an advantage for different scripts over
same scripts. We also investigated the effect of script similarity on EF using
the composite database described in Paap, Johnson, and Sawi (2014). The
English/other bilinguals were partitioned into three groups: 1) same-alphabet, n=107, 2) different alphabet/syllabary, n=25, and 3) logographic,
n=28. There was also a control group of English speaking monolinguals,
n=114. The participants completed a Simon task, a flanker task and a col-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

99

Poster Session C
or-shape switching task. Separate one-way ANOVAs were conducted on
global RT and interference scores for both the Simon and flanker tasks and
on mixing costs and switching costs. There were no significant differences
among the bilingual groups on any of the measures. There were no significant differences between monolinguals and the three bilingual groups in
either the flanker or switching task, but there was a significant monolingual
advantage on the Simon interference effect. In summary, no evidence was
found to support the hypothesis that script similarity affects general EF and
no evidence for a bilingual advantage over monolinguals.

C48
NETWORK DYNAMICS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL Derek M. Smith1,
Christine A. Godwin1, Joshua K. Grooms1,2, Shella D. Keilholz1,2, Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Emory University — Both the connectivity between functional brain networks and prestimulus activity have been
associated with enhanced performance on cognitive control tasks (Kelly et
al., 2008; Weissman et al., 2006). Research has shown that the dynamics of
the interaction between the default mode network (DMN) and the task positive network (TPN) is related to performance on an attention task (Thompson et al., 2013). Analysis of the connectivity dynamics demonstrated that
faster reaction times were associated with greater anticorrelation between
these networks before detected targets. To better understand the role of
dynamic connectivity in control processing subjects completed the flanker
and the global/local tasks during two functional magnetic resonance imaging sessions. Both tasks had long intertrial intervals (averaging 18.8 s & 18.2
s). Images were captured using a multiband sequence with a 700 millisecond repetition time. Thompson and colleagues’ method was applied to the
current data set. Changes in functional connectivity were charted by calculating network correlations for 12 second sliding time windows centered
at each instance of the stimulus. It was predicted that faster performance
especially for incongruent trials would be associated with more anticorrelation between the DMN and the TPN. Results support this prediction. These
findings show that dynamic connectivity analysis has the potential to open
a new dimension of control research.

C49
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS ASSOCIATED WITH RECRUITMENT
OF RESPONSE INHIBITION NETWORK DURING A GO/NO-GO
TASK Christopher N. Cascio1, Gwendolyn M. Lawson1, Martha J. Farah1, Emily
B. Falk1; 1University of Pennsylvania — Socioeconomic status has long been

linked to health and educational disparities, and recent research suggests
that some of these disparities may arise as the result of SES effects on brain
development. The current study aims to extend our knowledge of SES and
brain function in young people by examining individual differences in the
response inhibition network (basal ganglia and right inferior frontal gyrus).
Seventy-one adolescent males between the ages of 16-17 were recruited
from the State Driver Registry of recently licensed Michigan teens as part
of a larger multi-study project examining adolescent driving behavior.
Participants completed an fMRI go/no-go task as well as self-report measures of SES (parental education and ladder measures of subjective social
status [SSS]). Although neither measure of SES predicted no-go inhibitory
performance, SES effects were observed in brain activation on inhibitory trials. Parents’ education significantly correlated with activity in the
response inhibition network controlling for task performance, t(64)=2.55,
β=.30, p=.013. The association between parents’ education and response
inhibition network activity was primarily driven by father’s education,
t(61)=3.60, β=.42, p<.001. SSS measures were not available for all subjects
but for the 35 who filled out US and community ladders, community status
was also predictive, t(31)=2.51, β=.41, p=.018. The current results demonstrate that holding performance constant, teens of lower SES, and defined
by parental (particularly father’s), education show less responsivity in the
response inhibition network during a go/no-go task. Overall, these results
reveal SES differences in neural inhibitory control even when behavioral
performance is equivalent.

100

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
C50
THE ROLE OF MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY IN THE NEUROCOGNITIVE PROCESSING OF DERIVED WORDS Francesca Carota1,2,
Mirjana Bozic1,2, William Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1Neurolex, Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, 2MRC-CBU — A recurring question in the neuro-

cognition of language is whether words (e.g. happiness) formed by existing
stems (e.g. happy) and suffixes (e.g. -ness) rely on morpheme- or wordbased representations. Cross-modal priming studies suggest that semantically transparent words, in which the meaning of the stem is preserved, are
decompositionally analysed. Morphological decomposability has been proposed to correlate with productivity, i.e. the readiness of suffixes to form
new words. However, cross-linguistic neuroimaging evidence showed that
derived words activate bilateral fronto-temporal network underlying perceptual/semantic interpretation of whole-form words, rather than left perisylvian regions specialised for decomposable grammatical sequences. Yet,
absence of competition effects between transparent forms and their stems
suggests some preservation of their internal morphological structure. Here,
we investigated how morphological productivity affects the neurocognitive
representation of derived words in a synthetic language, Italian. In an fMRI
experiment combining univariate and multivariate analyses, we covaried
transparency/opacity of the stems with productivity of the suffixes. Univariate results showed that transparent and opaque words, whether productive or not, engaged the language system bilaterally. Using parametric
modulator analyses we found that decreased suffix productivity elicited
bilateral fronto-temporal activations. These effects were driven by non-decompositional opaque words. Multivariate results from Representational
Similarity Analysis revealed that suffix productivity predicted single-word
information patterns in LIFG and bilateral temporal regions. These effects
were predominant in transparent words. These neurocognitive properties
of derived forms reflect whole-word representations, but also a degree of
decompositional processing of transparent words, with preserved marking
of morphological structure for the derivational suffix.

C51
A LINEAR REGRESSION ERP INVESTIGATION OF WORD READING IN ARABIC: MORPHOLOGY FIRST, FORM AND SEMANTICS
LATER Sami Boudelaa1, Hosny M. Al-Dali1, Yury Shtyrov2; 1United Arab Emirates
University, Linguistics Department, 2Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, Institute for Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark — The brain

mechanisms underlying the simultaneous processing of different types
of psycholinguistic information remain obscure; particularly lacking are
investigations of such processes in non-Indo-European languages. Here, we
used multichannel EEG to investigate the neurophysiological time course
of lexical processes for a range of psycholinguistic variables in Arabic. Ten
psycholinguistic variables of 200 Arabic nouns were submitted to a principal component analysis, which yielded three orthogonal components
likely to have different spatio-temporal signatures. The first component
loaded significantly on morphological variables, particularly the family
size of the root and its token frequency. The second component loaded on
form-related variables (e.g., word pattern frequency, orthographic neighbourhood), and the third one on semantic variables (e.g., transparent root
family size i.e., the number of words featuring the same root and sharing
a transparent semantic relationship). These components were combined
with the variables Laterality (left, central, right) and Caudality (anterior,
middle, posterior) and regressed against the neurophysiological responses
recorded in a visual lexical decision task at two time windows where most
prominent responses were observed: 200-300 ms, and 350-500 ms. The
results indicate that while morphological variables had a significant effect
at both time windows and lateralized to the left hemisphere, form-related
variables and semantic variables showed significant effects only in the later
time window and were bilaterally distributed. These results underline the
primacy of morphology as a domain that governs lexical processing in
Semitic languages and suggest that information about different domains
of knowledge have different time courses and distinct underlying neural
generator topographies.

2015 Annual Meeting

C52
VISUAL AND LINGUISTIC INFLUENCES IN A NEW AMERICAN
SIGN LANGUAGE (ASL) NAMING TEST Svenna Pedersen1, Cindy Farnady1, Shane Blau2, Ursula Bellugi1, David Corina2, Greg Hickok3; 1The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, 2University of California, Davis, 3University of
California, Irvine — The Boston naming test (BNT) (Kaplan, Goodglass &

Weintraub, 1983) is a widely used neuropsychological assessment tool to
measure confrontational word retrieval in individuals with aphasia. While
the BNT has been used in patients who speak languages other than English,
many of the items are not appropriate for use with deaf users of a signed
language such as ASL. Here we report on an ASL naming test developed
for probing naming functions in deaf signers with left and right hemisphere
damage. The Salk Institute Naming Test (SNT) contains 40 line drawings
graded in difficulty. We present normative data from 107 signers ranging
in age (44-84 years) and data from five right-hemisphere damaged (RHD)
signers and seven left-hemisphere damaged (LHD) signers. Performance of
control subjects was highly accurate and stable across the age span (mean
= 39 SD .44). Data from RHD subjects indicated normal performance from
four subjects (mean = 39.5) however one subject showed impaired performance (30/40). Six of seven LHD subjects show no impairment on this
measures (mean score = 40) with one subject showing impairment (27/40).
The RHD patient with a middle cerebral artery stroke showed evidence
of visual misperceptions of line drawings leading to erroneous naming
responses (signed BRACELET for belt, GRAPEFRUIT for onion, TRUNK
for tree etc.). In contrast the LHD signer with an ischemic stroke in the left
putamen showed perseverative responses, anomia, lexical substitutions
and off-target responses. We discuss these data in reference to cortical networks for visual and linguistic processing.

C53
EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL (ERP) EFFECTS OF NEIGHBORHOOD
DENSITY OF SPOKEN WORDS IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS
Cynthia Hunter1; 1State University of New York at Buffalo — Words that sound

similar to many other words, or have high neighborhood density, are recognized more slowly and less accurately than words that sound similar to
few other words, and this decrement in recognition for high-density words
is more pronounced in older than young adults. The current project used
event-related potentials (ERPs) as well as behavioral measures of response
time and accuracy to examine density and age effects during recognition
of spoken words and nonwords. Behavioral results showed equivalent
density effects in the lexical decision task for young and older adults as
well as main effects of age, with older adults responding more slowly and
less accurately than young adults. ERP results for young adults showed
an effect of neighborhood density on the N400, such that N400 amplitude
was larger in high- than low-density conditions. Similar modulation of
N400 amplitude by density has been reported for visual words and may
reflect spreading activation to semantic representations of neighbors. Older
adults had reduced N400 amplitudes compared to young adults and did
not show an N400 density effect. Instead, older adults showed a late effect
of neighborhood density, with greater positive amplitude for high- than
low-density words between 800-1400 milliseconds after word onset. The
functional significance of the late density effect is not clear, but could reflect
compensatory processes involved in lexical access in older adults. Overall,
the results are consistent with previous work and provide new insights into
the time course of lexical access in both young and older adults.

C54
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF CHINESE PHONOLOGICAL ACTIVATION DURING ENGLISH AND CHINESE WORD READING IN CHINESE-ENGLISH BILINGUALS Yun Wen1, Walter J. B. van Heuven1, Ruth
Filik1; 1School of Psychology, The University of Nottingham, United Kingdom —
Brain potentials have revealed that Chinese-English bilinguals automatically activate the sound of the corresponding Chinese translations when
they read English words (Wu & Thierry, 2010). The phonological components of Chinese words consist of syllable segments (consonants and
vowels) and lexical tone. It is, however, unclear whether the segmental
(S) and/or tonal (T) information of the Chinese words becomes available
when Chinese phonological information is activated. To investigate the
time course of Chinese phonological activation during English and Chinese

Poster Session C
word reading, two ERP experiments were conducted with Chinese-English
bilinguals reading English (N=32, Experiment 1) or Chinese (N=32, Experiment 2) word pairs. Experiments involved a semantic relatedness judgment
task with word pairs in which the repetition of segmental (S) and tonal (T)
information of the concealed Chinese translations (Experiment 1) or of the
Chinese words (Experiment 2) was systematically manipulated in semantically and orthographically unrelated word pairs: +S+T e.g. media-rose [媒
体-玫瑰 (mei2ti3-mei2gui4)]; +S-T e.g. tail–scarf [尾巴-围巾 (wei3ba1-wei2jin1)]; -S+T e.g. black-editor [黑色-编辑(hei1se4-bian1ji2)]; -S-T e.g. cardfrog [卡片-青蛙(ka3pian4-qing1wa1)]. The data revealed that concealed
+S+T repetition modulated ERPs between 400 and 600 ms (Experiment 1)
and overt +S+T repetition (Experiment 2) modulated the ERPs between 300
to 350 ms in the right hemisphere. No repetition effects were found in the
other conditions. These findings suggest that Chinese segmental and tonal
information is activated during English and Chinese word reading.

C55
NEURAL CORRELATES OF VERB ARGUMENT STRUCTURE CHARACTERISTICS Svetlana Malyutina1, Dirk-Bart den Ouden1; 1University of South
Carolina — Verb argument structure (VAS) is pivotal to sentence construc-

tion, since it determines participant roles, as well as their grammatical form
and syntactic position in a sentence. Neural correlates of VAS retrieval have
mainly been studied in terms of the number of arguments, whereas data on
other VAS characteristics and their respective impact on storage/retrieval
vs. integration/structure-building load are limited. We used fMRI to investigate three understudied VAS characteristics: number of subcategorization
frames, number of number-of-argument options and number of thematic
options. Participants judged the well-formedness of sentences that differed
on the above VAS characteristics of the verbs but had the same structure
(e.g., The student completed the task; The actress sang a song). The number
of subcategorization options was associated with increased activation in
the left superior frontal gyrus and the temporo-parietal junction, extending to the middle temporal gyrus. The number of thematic options of the
verb was associated with increased activation in the left cingulum and in
white matter underlying pars orbitalis and triangularis of the left inferior
frontal gyrus. No activation was specific to processing the number of number-of-argument options. The results indicate that several VAS characteristics, beyond the traditional measure of the number of arguments, are
exhaustively accessed in verb processing even when not directly triggered
by context. Specific areas of activation suggest that the number of subcategorization options and possibly the number of thematic options may be
associated with greater storage/retrieval demands, rather than integration/structure-building demands.

C56
MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING OF ADULT DYSLEXICS: A STUDY
OF VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION Mailce Borges Mota1,3, Janaina Weissheimer2,4, Anna Belavina Kuerten1,4, Angela Mafra de Moraes1,4; 1Federal University of Santa Catarina - Brasil, 2Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
- Brasil, 3National Council for Scientific and Technological Development CNPq,
4
Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel CAPES — The
morphological processing of dyslexics is an issue of intense debate. The
reason for this debate is that morphemes possess both form and meaning
properties. While the form-driven hypothesis suggests that morphological
processing is primarily based on form, the meaning-driven hypothesis proposes that semantic properties of morphemes are at stake. Here we address
both hypotheses by investigating adult dyslexics, native speakers of Brazilian Portuguese, while processing written morphology. We address the
question of whether adults diagnosed with dyslexia rely on morphemes
during visual word recognition, and if so, whether this reliance is influenced by their semantic properties. Based on Quémart and Casalis (2013),
we carried out a masked priming experiment in which participants performed a lexical decision task based on four conditions: morphological
(e.g. livreiro – livro), pseudoderivation (e.g., vagão – vaga), orthographic
control (e.g. corrida – cor) and semantic control (e.g., maçã – fruta). The
participants were presented with words on a computer screen and were
required to decide whether the words were real words in Brazilian Portuguese. Results showed that dyslexics relied on morphemes during visual
word recognition, in line with the results in Quémart and Casalis (2013).
Significant morphological priming effects, in the morphological condition

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

101

Poster Session C
only, support the hypothesis that dyslexics are able to process larger units,
i.e. morphemes, to decode words faster. These results are interpreted as
evidence that dyslexics’ morphological processing is more influenced by
meaning than form, and that the mental lexicon of adult dyslexics is organized around morpheme units.

LANGUAGE: Other
C57
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF EXECUTIVE CONTROL IN SPOKEN
NOUN-PHRASE PRODUCTION:DYNAMICS OF UPDATING, INHIBITING, AND SHIFTING Katarzyna Sikora1, Ardi Roelofs1, Daan Hermans1,2;
1

Radboud University Nijmegen, 2Royal Dutch Kentalis — Previous behavioral
studies have provided evidence for an involvement of executive control
in language production, but little is known about its electrophysiological basis. According to an influential proposal, executive control consists
of updating, inhibiting, and shifting abilities. Previous studies showed
that these abilities determine the response time (RT) of picture naming
and description. In the present electroencephalography (EEG) study, we
assessed noun-phrase production using picture description and a picture-word interference paradigm. We measured picture description RTs
to assess length, distractor, and switch effects, which have been shown to
reflect the updating, inhibiting, and shifting abilities, respectively. In addition, we measured event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to determine how
length, distractor, and switch effects are reflected in ERP components, in
particular the N200 and P300. Previous research has suggested that inhibiting and shifting are associated with modulations of anterior and posterior N200 subcomponents, respectively, and updating with modulations of
the P300. Based on this, we expected that the distractor and switch effects
would be reflected in the N200 subcomponents and the length effect in
the P300. We obtained length, distractor, and switch effects in the picture
description RTs, and an interaction between length and switch. Widely distributed across the scalp, there was a switch effect in the N200 followed by
a length effect in the P300, whereas distractor did not yield any ERP modulation. Moreover, the effects of length and switch interacted in the posterior
N200. These results provide electrophysiological evidence on the dynamics
of executive control in noun-phrase production.

C58
IMPLICIT DETECTION OF POETIC HARMONY IN WELSH REVEALED
BY ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY Awel Vaughan-Evans1, Robat Trefor1, Llion
Jones1, Peredur Lynch1, Manon Jones1, Guillaume Thierry1; 1Bangor University —
T.S. Eliot famously argued that “genuine poetry can communicate before
it is understood”. Was this mere provocation or is it possible that some
aspects of poetry may be processed implicitly by the human brain, independently of our ability to understand meaning? Here, we investigated
electrophysiological brain responses elicited by the final word of sentences
written in ‘Cynghanedd’, an ancient form of Welsh poetry constrained by
subtle yet strict rules of alliteration and rhythm. Fluent Welsh speakers,
who never received any formal education or training on Cynghanedd were
presented with sentences ending in a word that either completed the sentence in conformity with the rules of Cynghanedd, violated its alliteration
rule, violated its rhythmic structure, or violated both its alliteration and
rhythmic requirements. Upon reading the last word of each sentence, participants indicated whether or not they considered the phrase to be well
formed. Critically, participants were not given any explanation of the rules
underlying Cynghanedd and, as expected, their accuracy was not significantly different from chance. Strikingly, however, event-related brain
potentials elicited by correct completions displayed a classic P3a response
of significantly greater amplitude than in all other conditions. This result
demonstrates that fluent Welsh speakers implicitly accepted the orthodox
Cynghanedd phrases to a greater extent than incorrect ones, despite having
no explicit knowledge of the underlying rules. Our findings suggest that
processing of poetry in the human brain is implicit and spontaneous.

102

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

C59
INVESTIGATING THE TIME COURSE OF LEXICALITY AND FREQUENCY EFFECTS IN SPANISH-ENGLISH BILINGUALS Beerelim
Corona Dzul1, Walter van Heuven1, Ruth Filik1; 1University of Nottingham, United
Kingdom — The BIA+ model (Dijkstra & van Heuven, 2002) assumes that

the activation of second language codes is temporally delayed relative to
first language codes in unbalanced bilinguals. Previous research has found
these temporal delays in Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) components when
manipulating lexicality (Proverbio, Adorni & Zani, 2009) and frequency
(Liu & Perfetti, 2003). However, other studies have observed that frequency
effects only occur in the target language and not in the non-target language
(Rodriguez-Fornells et al., 2002). The present ERP experiment investigated
the time course of word frequency and lexicality effects in Spanish-English late bilinguals (n=19) using dual-choice go/no-go tasks. Each of the
tasks utilized high and low frequency Spanish and English words, pseudo-words, and letter strings. Participants were required to respond to
words in the target language (which could be Spanish or English) and to
withhold responses to non-target language items, pseudo-words, and letter
strings. ERP results revealed a main effect of lexicality from 400-500ms
that occurred earlier for Spanish than for English words in right central (30
ms) and centro-parietal (50 ms) brain regions. Behavioral data revealed a
similar sized frequency effect in each language (Spanish: 92ms vs. English:
104ms, p=0.44), however, faster responses were observed for Spanish than
for English words. ERPs revealed a frequency effect in target and non-target words in both languages, emerging between 400-600ms. In line with
BIA+ model, these findings confirm delayed effects of lexicality and frequency in the second language irrespective of whether the second language
is the target or non-target language.

C60
THE ROLE OF RIGHT TO LEFT HEMISPHERE CONNECTIVITY IN
SENTENCE PROCESSING IN POST-STROKE APHASIA Ronald
Chu1,2, Tali Bitan2,3, Allen Braun4, Jed Meltzer1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute - Baycrest Centre, 3University of Haifa, 4National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders — Behavioral impairments in

post-stroke aphasia are associated with disrupted connectivity within the
language network. Studies have typically focused on the higher-level language areas like the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and the temporal parietal
junction (TPJ). However, recent studies have shown that aphasia is also
associated with modulations of connections to and from the primary auditory cortex (A1). A common hypothesis is that suppression from right to left
homotopic brain regions is negatively associated with recovery from aphasia. The current study assessed effective connectivity of A1 connections
in eight post-stroke aphasia patients during fMRI with a sentence-picture
matching task. Specifically, we used DCM to assess effective connectivity
between the IFG, A1 and TPJ across both hemispheres. Parameter estimates
were computed using Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) across 16 models.
The results revealed excitatory reciprocal inter-hemispheric homotopic
connectivity at the level of IFG and at the level of A1 for controls, but only at
the level of TPJ in patients. Moreover, the connection RA1-LA1, which was
excitatory in controls, was positively correlated with language performance
in patients. In contrast two inter-hemispheric heterotopic connections were
negatively correlated with language performance in patients: the feedback
connection (LIFG-RA1) which was inhibitory in controls, and RA1-LTPJ,
which was not significant in controls. Altogether these results do not support a model of homotopic right to left suppression in aphasia, but suggest
an important role for inter-hemispheric connections with right A1 in both
adaptive and non-adaptive language processing in aphasic patients.

C61
AN ERP STUDY OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RESPONSE TO
ORTHOGRAPHIC/PHONOLOGICAL CONFLICT Suzanne Welcome1;
1

University of Missouri - St. Louis — In skilled readers, behavioral and electrophysiological measures have demonstrated that orthographic knowledge
influences phonological decisions such that knowledge about a word’s
visual form intrudes upon decisions regarding its sound. While such effects
are clear at a group level, it is less clear whether meaningful variation in this
effect exists within the adult population. We used a visual rhyme task to
investigate the interaction of orthographic and phonological information in

2015 Annual Meeting
university students with varying reading skill. Word pairs that shared both
orthography and phonology (e.g., throat/boat), differed in both orthography and phonology (e.g., snow/arm), shared only orthography (e.g.,
farm/warm), and shared only phonology (e.g., vote/boat) were visually
presented. Behaviorally, phonological decoding skill was associated with
the extent to which orthographic conflict impacted rhyme decisions such
that individuals with worse nonword reading performance were more
sensitive to orthographic conflict. When orthography and phonology did
not conflict, ERP components did not significantly vary with reading skill.
However, under conditions of orthographic conflict, relationships between
reading skill and the size of early ERP components emerged. Specifically,
individuals with lower phonological decoding scores showed more positive voltage differences between orthographically congruent and incongruent word pairs. These results suggest that university students with worse
phonological decoding skill may differ from their peers either in the reading strategies they use or in the degree to which they automatically access
word form information.

C62
ABSTRACT LETTER POSITION SENSITIVITY IN THE VWFA: REPRESENTATIONAL SIMILARITY ANALYSES IN EMEG SOURCE SPACE
Jana Klímová1, Caroline M. Whiting1,2, Samarth Varma1,3, Barry Devereux4, William D. Marslen-Wilson1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge,
UK, 2MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, 3Donders Centre for
Cognition, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4CSLB, Department of
Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK — The early stages of reading engage

basic visual object recognition processes in inferior occipitotemporal cortex,
with the “visual word form area” (VWFA) thought to play a critical – though
not fully understood – role in this process. Focusing on the VWFA, we investigate the spatio-temporal dynamics of the neural systems involved in mapping from visual input to orthographic representations, asking how visual
(retinotopic) and more abstract orthographic properties relate over time to
neurocomputational activity in the VWFA. Searchlight-based multivariate
pattern analysis (Representational Similarity Analysis/RSA) was applied
to combined magneto- and electroencephalography (EMEG) data, mapped
into MNE source space. We analysed a set of visually-presented words to
test: (a) visual models based on pixel-level overlap between word images
and (b) orthographic models counting shared letters between words, contrasting position-specific with position-nonspecific models. A third set of
letter-based models asked whether the VWFA is organized retinotopically
(words aligned relative to a central fixation point) or whether it is sensitive
to abstract letter position (left aligned). RSA delineated separate regions
in the ventral processing stream, with left occipital cortex showing strong
early fit to the visual model (70-180ms) and the ‘retinotopic’ letter model
(50-130ms). The position-specific orthographic and the abstract letter position models (~160-400ms) activate left posterior fusiform gyrus including
VWFA and pITG, extending into pMTG. The position-nonspecific model, in
contrast, does not engage VWFA and adjacent areas. These results support
the hypothesis that VWFA responses are independent of the visual field
position but sensitive to abstract letter position in a word.

C63
LINKING GENES, BRAIN, AND BEHAVIOR IN A STUDY OF SECOND
LANGUAGE LEARNING Ping Mamiya1, Todd Richard1, Jeff Stevenson1, Evan
Eichler1, Patricia Kuhl1; 1University of Washington — Behavioral studies have
shown that executive function (EF) skills are related to second language
learning abilities in children. However, the brain and genetic mechanisms
by which EF affects second language learning have not been studied. The
goal of this study is to examine how the interactions between genes and
the brain’s fiber tract connectivity involved in EF can affect late adolescents experiencing English in an immersion program. Methods: We tested
incoming Chinese students who entered an intensive 2-week English emersion experience prior to starting college. Fiber tract integrity was measured
using non-invasive diffusion-tensor imaging technique. We identified the
single nucleotide polymorphisms of the Catechol O-methyltransferase
(COMT) gene and Serotonin transporter regulatory region (5HTTLPR) by
using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Results: An individual’s success
at second language learning was significantly correlated with the integrity
of the fiber tracks connecting Wernicke’s area and prefrontal cortex areas
important for EF. Moreover, our data indicate that this structure-function

Poster Session C
relationship differs significantly among individuals with different COMT
and 5HTTLPR genotypes. Conclusions: Previous studies show that an individual’s ability to learn a second language differs with age. The current
study indicates that two other factors affect adolescent learners: (1) the
structural integrity of fiber tracts related to EF, and (2) genetic variations
related to EF. The interaction between these two factors is important. We
believe this is the first evidence showing that the interaction between brain
structure and genetic makeup can influence second language learning.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
C64
STRATEGIC MECHANISMS OF PREDICTIVE LANGUAGE PROCESSING Trevor Brothers1, Matthew J. Traxler1,2, Tamara Y. Swaab1,2; 1UC Davis
Department of Psychology, 2UC Davis Center for Mind and Brain — While antic-

ipation plays a critical role during online language comprehension, it is
unclear to what extent this process is subject to top-down strategic control.
In the current study, participants read two-sentence passages under different task instructions. In one block, participants read for comprehension,
and in another participants were instructed to actively predict sentence-final words and report their accuracy on each trial. By comparing effects of
sentence constraint across the two blocks, we assessed the influence of predictive strategies on online ERP measures of sentence processing. While
both blocks showed an N400 effect of cloze probability at sentence final
critical words, this effect was larger in the prediction block. A late frontal
positivity, which has been linked to the costs of disconfirmed predictions,
was also enhanced in amplitude. For words appearing earlier in the sentence, content words showed N400 facilitation in the prediction task, while
function words instead showed an enhanced “ramp-like” negativity (400700ms) at frontal electrode sites. Critically, the size of this frontal negativity
was correlated with the degree of N400 facilitation observed later in the
sentence at the final critical word (r = 0.548, p < 0.01). Based on these results,
as well as previous work (Van Petten & Kutas, 1991), we argue that this
neurophysiological response may index the generation of specific lexical
predictions.

C65
CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT CONCRETE WORDS FORM
A LARGE NETWORK IN THE BRAIN Kaoutar Skiker1, Mounir Maouene2;
1

University of Abdelmalek Essadi, Tangier, Morocco, 2ENSAT, University of Abdelmalek Essadi, Tangier, Morocco — There is now strong evidence that concrete

words denoting objects of various kinds (animal, tools, fruit/vegetables)
evoke activation in perceptual and motor areas that are specialized to represent a particular kind of features (visual, auditory, gustatory, olfactory,
action, tactile) (K. Patterson & al., 2007). For example, visual areas become
active during the processing of animal words, motor areas become active
during the processing of tool words and gustatory areas become active
during the processing of food words. However, how these modality-specific areas work with each other in semantic tasks involving concrete words
remain still unclear. In this study, we address this issue from a network
perspective suggesting that modality-specific areas form a large network,
where nodes correspond to brain areas and edges represent the functional
and/or anatomical connectivity between them. This network, as indicated
by neuroimaging studies, can be modulated by specific semantic tasks,
with some areas increase their activity during some specific semantic tasks
and decrease their activity in others (Binder & al., 2009). Furthermore, we
hypothesize that this representation provides a powerful tool to explain the
category specific activation extensively detected in functional MRI studies
during the processing of concrete words. Finally, this representation can
be helpful to account of some category-specific semantic deficits observed
often in patients with semantic dementia and Alzheimer diseases (Grossman & al., 2013).

C66
PRONOUN RESOLUTION IS SENSITIVE TO THE COMPLEXITY OF
THE ANTECEDENT: EVIDENCE FROM ERPS Melissa Troyer1, Philip
Hofmeister2, Marta Kutas1; 1University of California, San Diego, 2University of
Essex — In behavioral paradigms, understanding displaced elements in
relative clauses and resolving pronouns are contingent on an antecedent’s

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

103

Poster Session C
complexity. Here, we investigated electrophysiological differences in pronoun processing based on antecedent complexity, operationally defined
as the number of adjectives modifying the antecedent noun. We used
three-sentence discourses differing only in the number of adjectives (0-2;
low-, mid-, and high-complexity conditions) modifying a critical noun in
the first sentence. In the final sentence, a pronoun unambiguously referred
to this antecedent, e.g.: “Outside the converted warehouse, a(n) (large and
(intimidating)) BOUNCER prevented a couple from entering. They looked
as if they had already had too much to drink. The couple cursed HIM as
they went off in search of another bar.” As expected, at the critical noun
(BOUNCER), complexity was associated with N400 amplitude, indexing
ease of semantic access: N400 amplitude was reduced for the high-complexity relative to the low-complexity condition, indicating facilitation for
antecedent nouns preceded by multiple adjectives. Perhaps surprisingly,
N400 amplitude likewise varied systematically at the pronoun in the third
sentence with complexity of the antecedent: high-complexity antecedents
were associated with reduced amplitudes in the N400 time window (300500 ms) at centro-parietal sites compared to low-complexity antecedents,
but only for pronouns in object position. Minimally, these results suggest
the brain is sensitive to antecedent complexity when processing a subsequent pronoun. These effects emerged most clearly when the pronoun
occurred in a syntactic position that likely made its occurrence more predictable and where subject-verb information may aid in the retrieval process.

C67
BUILDING A CORTICAL NETWORK OF SEMANTIC CONCEPTS
IN A SECOND LANGUAGE: ERP EVIDENCE OF FAST LEARNING
VIA COMPUTERIZED GAMES Kiera O’Neil1, Aurélie Lagarrigue3, Aaron J.
Newman1, Cheryl Frenck-Mestre2; 1NeuroCognitive Imaging Lab, Dalhousie University, 2Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Aix-Marseille Université,
3
Brain and Language Research Institute, Aix-Marseille Université — What does

it take to acquire a semantic network in a second language? The present
ERP study shows extremely rapid instantiation of both learned words
and related concepts, via computerized games (“LANGA”). Participants
served as their own control. Electrical activity of the brain, recorded at the
scalp, was examined prior to exposure to the second language and 8 days
later, following a 6 day training session (preceded and followed by orientation and consolidation, respectively). Participants learned 12 words per
day (nouns and verbs), for a total of 72 words over 6 consecutive days.
Results show rapid changes in cortical activity, associated with learning.
Prior to exposure, no modulation of the N400 component was found as a
function of the correct match vs. mismatch of audio presentation of words
and their associated images. Post training, a large N400 effect was found for
mismatch trials compared to correctly matched audio-visual trials. More
importantly, images that were semantically related to learned words (eg.
for the learned word “horse” the image of a saddle was presented), produced a reduction of the N400 compared to mismatched pairs (eg. the same
learned word “horse” paired with the image of a building). This semantic
priming effect suggests that the words in the new language were rapidly
integrated with existing semantic networks, rather than existing as an isolated second language lexicon. Our results attest to the plasticity of adult
learners’ brains and provide evidence for rapid onset of a semantic network
in a late learned language.

C68
INDIVIDUAL SPATIO-COGNITIVE DIFFERENCES AND MENTAL
SIMULATION OF LANGUAGE Nikola Vukovic1,2, John N. Williams1; 1DTAL,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, 2Faculty of Psychology, Higher School of
Economics, Moscow, Russia — Contrary to traditional theories, new research
suggests that language meaning is ‘embodied’ and depends on mental simulation in sensory and motor brain systems. On this view, linguistic representations should ultimately end up being shaped by individual differences
and experience. However, apart from assuming it, very little prior research
has actually investigated the role that these differences have on perceptual
simulation during sentence comprehension. For example, research on perspective taking in language has revealed many insights about simulation of
visual features, but has largely focused on linguistic constraints, such as the
role of pronouns in guiding perspective adoption. Here we describe a study
where preferential usage of egocentric and allocentric reference frames in

104

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
individuals (which we know is associated with behavioural changes, as
well as structural brain changes) was assessed, following which the two
participant groups were tested on a standard sentence-picture verification
task. Across two experiments, we show that individual biases in spatial
reference frame adoption observed in non-linguistic tasks influence visual
simulation of perspective in language. Our findings suggest that typically
reported grand-averaged effects may obscure important between-subject
differences, and support proposals arguing for representational pluralism,
where perceptual information is integrated dynamically in comprehension,
and in a way that is sensitive to contextual and especially individual constraints.

C69
A NEUROSEMANTIC BEHAVIORAL FEATURE MODEL PREDICTS
CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATION IN THE BRAIN Matthew E. Phillips1,
Jeff Phillips2, Shannon M. Tubridy3, Matthew R. Johnson4, Svetlana V. Shinkareva5,
Rachel Millin1, Todd Gureckis3, Murray Grossman2, Rajan Bhattacharyya1; 1HRL
Laboratories LLC, 2University of Pennsylvania, 3New York University, 4Yale University, 5University of South Carolina — Concepts are typically described within
highly structured ontologies. At the same time, conceptual representations in the brain are organized within distributed and non-hierarchical
networks. Although conceptually-evoked neural activity patterns can be
classified in part by coarse features (e.g. ontological categories or sensorimotor activity), predictive models utilizing ontological and neural features
as basis elements are lacking. Here, we report an fMRI experiment where
participants (n=3) viewed single word concepts (e.g. “magazine”) and neurosemantic features (e.g. has the quality of “visual appearance”) presented
in a block-design. Each block was organized around a central theme with
presentations of 13-20 related words. At the end of each block participants
were presented with two words and asked to indicate the more representative word. Words were selected from multiple sources: the highest rated
words along each feature dimension from 619 words rated on Amazon
Mechanical Turk, upper-ontology wordnet domains, the UMBC corpus,
thesaurus synonyms, WordNet hypernyms, and other sources. Word-feature ratings were used in a weighted feature mixture model to predict conceptual representations. We found that the neurosemantic feature basis set
outperformed other vector and statistics-based models of concept feature
composition for predicting the neural activations of concepts in our set
(Pearson’s R = 0.133 p=0.02). In addition, the neural activity of single word
concepts was better modeled by average ratings across people than by individual ratings (generated by the same participant). Furthermore, we found
that neural activity patterns of features and concepts included heteromodal
association areas previously associated with binding of distributed semantic feature representations.

C70
ENHANCED PUPILLARY RESPONSE TO UNEXPECTED WORDS
IN SPEECH COMPREHENSION Joseph Wachutka1, Zane Zheng2, Wesley
Alford1, Arthur Wingfield1; 1Brandeis University, 2Lasell College — How does the
sentence “He mailed the letter without a stone” sound to you? You likely
find the word ‘stone’ to be unexpected, as it does not fit your expectations
for the sentence. Consequently, more cognitive effort may be required of
you, as a listener, to decipher the intended message than if the sentence had
unfolded as expected. In the present study, we sought to compare the levels
of cognitive effort associated with word expectancy in a spoken sentence by
measuring pupil sizes. Young adult participants (n = 17) listened to 63 sentences taken from high-expectancy sentence completion norms (Block and
Baldwin, 2010). A random subset of these sentences had their final word
changed to something unexpected prior to being played for participants.
Participants’ pupil size was recorded using an infrared camera, and the
degree of pupil change following the expected or unexpected word was calculated. We observed that pupil dilation (% increase) in response to unexpected words (M = 5.13, SD = 2.68) was greater than that following highly
expected words (M = 3.14, SD = 1.52); t(16) = 2.92, p = .01. The latency (in
ms) to reach peak pupil size was also larger following unexpected words
(M = 1225, SD = 371) than for expected words (M = 1001, SD = 244); t(16) =
2.92, p = .01. Therefore, our data suggests that pupillometry is able to reveal
the enhanced level of cognitive processing required for unexpected words
during speech comprehension.

2015 Annual Meeting

C71
STRUCTURAL COMPLEXITY MODULATES “SEMANTIC P600” IN
SENTENCE PROCESSING Peiyun Zhou1,2, Joseph Toscano3, Susan Garnsey1,2, Kiel Christianson1,2; 1Unveristy of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Beckman
Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, 3Villanova University — “Seman-

tic P600” effects are observed in event-related brain potential (ERP) waveforms when a noun in a sentence is highly plausible for some role associated
with the verb but not for the role it actually has in the sentence structure,
leading to conflict between meaning-based and structure-based analyses.
The ERP study reported here investigated meaning/structure conflict in
sentences containing relative clauses. In English, subject relatives (SR: The
parents that raised the twins...) are easier to understand than object relatives (OR: The twins that the parents raised…) Sentence versions were
also included that reversed the roles of the two nouns (Rev-SR: The twins
that raised the parents …; Rev-OR: The parents that the twins raised…),
making the sentences globally implausible and similar to those producing
semantic P600 responses. The goal was to investigate how differences in
the difficulty of structural analysis would affect the development of conflict
between meaning-based and structure-based analyses, as indexed by the
semantic P600. The results showed a semantic P600 for the word making
the sentence globally implausible only in the Rev-SR condition (the underlined second noun in the example above), not in the Rev-OR condition (the
underlined verb in the example above). Thus, the conflict indexed by the
semantic-P600 did not develop when structural analysis was more difficult.
Instead, however, an Anterior Negativity in the implausible OR condition
suggested that apparent implausibility may have led to uncertainty about
the structural analysis and triggered a search in working memory to check
on the order the nouns appeared in.

C72
COMPARING SEMANTIC REPRESENTATIONS OF ANIMALS AS
INFERRED FROM BRAIN READING STUDIES VERSUS BEHAVIORAL STUDIES: THEMATIC AND TAXONOMIC ORGANIZATION
Andrew Bauer1, Charles Kemp1, Marcel Just1; 1Carnegie Mellon University — The

advent of neuroimaging and brain-reading techniques has enabled new
approaches to the study of knowledge representations, based on multivoxel analysis of the brain activation patterns evoked by contemplation of
concepts such as animal concepts. The present fMRI study characterized
the content and organization of 30 animal concepts. A factor analysis of the
multi-voxel activation patterns underlying the individual concepts indicated that the semantic building blocks of the brain’s representations of the
animals were ferocity, intelligence, and body size. These findings can be
compared to behavioral studies of knowledge representation, which have
typically collected pairwise similarity ratings between two concepts. The
main semantic components inferred from the fMRI data generally resembled the semantic components inferred from the behavioral data from a
prominent previous study of the same animal concepts (Henley, 1969). But
despite the similarity in semantic content, hierarchical clustering analysis of
the two datasets revealed differences in the semantic organization observed
between the two paradigms. The behavioral similarity judgments indicated
that the animals were organized into taxonomically defined groups (e.g.
canine, feline, equine), consistent with other behavioral studies. By contrast, the neural representations of the animals were organized to a greater
extent by thematic relations that cut across taxonomic groups (e.g. animal
personality, body size, habitat). The difference in the results might derive
from differences in cognitive processing during judging similarities versus
contemplating one animal at a time. The results highlight the unique perspective afforded by neuroimaging, and suggest that knowledge is fundamentally more thematically organized than previously thought.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
C73
SPECIFIC MEMORY REACTIVATION PREVENTS RETROACTIVE
INTERFERENCE AND GENERAL MEMORY REACTIVATION PROMOTES PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE Joshua Koen1, Michael Rugg1;
1
University of Texas at Dallas — Both proactive and retroactive interference
can impair episodic memory. Here, we examined how memory reactiva-

Poster Session C
tion during encoding influences these two forms of interference. During a
scanned encoding phase, participants performed one of four tasks on each
member of a word list. Interference words were presented twice, with a
different encoding task at the first and second presentations, whereas
Control words were presented once. Participants subsequently undertook
a memory test where they recalled the tasks performed on each studied
word. The behavioral results showed evidence for robust retroactive and
proactive interference, such that memory for the encoding tasks was lower
for Interference trials relative to Control trials. A logistic regression model
was trained with the neural data to classify the four encoding tasks using
Control trials, and was applied to the Interference trials to obtain a general memory reactivation measure. Specifically, we extracted the classifier
evidence for the first encoding task during the second presentation of an
Interference trial. Specific reactivation was measured by correlating the
BOLD signal between the first and second presentation of an Interference
trial, using the same voxel set as for the classifier-based analysis. A multilevel logistic regression model demonstrated that specific, but not general,
reactivation positively predicted memory for the first task of an Interference trial. In contrast, memory for the second task of an Interference trial
was negatively predicted by general, but not specific, memory reactivation.
These results suggest that specific memory reactivation mitigates retroactive interference, whereas general reactivation increases the likelihood of
proactive interference.

C74
MEMORY-AWARENESS DEFICITS IN AMNESTIC MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Anthony Ryals1, Jonathan O’Neil1, M.-Marsel Mesulam1,
Sandra Weintraub1, Joel Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — Self-awareness of memory is critical for allowing individuals to use

knowledge of the current status of learning and memory to guide study
decisions (i.e., memory monitoring and control). Brain regions crucial
for memory awareness, such as frontopolar and medial temporal cortex,
undergo pathophysiological changes early in Alzheimer’s dementia.
Indeed, some prior research suggests that disconnection between memory
performance and self-awareness can occur in amnestic mild cognitive
impairment (aMCI), which presages full Alzheimer’s dementia. However,
little is known regarding the specifics of memory awareness disruption
in aMCI. We therefore assessed deficits of memory awareness using four
types of judgments in both visual and verbal memory tasks in 14 patients
with aMCI diagnoses and 15 age-matched healthy controls. Item-by-item
memory awareness measures included prospective judgments of learning
(JOLs), prospective “feeling of knowing” judgments (FOKs), and retrospective confidence judgments (RCJs). Global-level awareness was assessed
using aggregate predictions and postdictions. Memory awareness accuracy
was calculated as the correspondence between awareness judgments and
objective memory performance. There were no significant group differences in JOL accuracy. FOK accuracy was significantly worse for patients
than controls on the verbal task. RCJ estimates reliably discriminated
patients from controls for both verbal and visual tasks. Further, global-level
awareness was accurate for controls but not patients in the verbal task. We
thus identified impairments of memory awareness in aMCI that were selective for judgment type and for material type. Implications for accounts of
brain and memory impairments in aMCI and for sensitive test development
for early aMCI will be discussed.

C75
THE ROLE OF THE HIPPOCAMPUS IN TEMPORAL INTEGRATION
ACROSS BOUNDARIES Sarah DuBrow1, Brynn Sherman1, Lila Davachi1;
1
New York University — Event boundaries have been shown to reduce memory
for information presented across boundaries. Recent evidence suggests that
the hippocampus is involved in bridging boundaries to link distinct events
in memory. To address the necessity of the hippocampus in bridging events,
we tested patients with hippocampal damage in two temporal estimation
tasks. In the first task, participants made temporal distance judgments on
pairs of images that were either studied within the same event or across
an event boundary. Healthy participants (N=20) rated images presented
across event boundaries as occurring farther apart than those presented
within the same event. The second task assessed whether immediate temporal duration estimations varied as a function of perceptual changes. Critically, on half the trials, stimulus color was constant (single event), while on

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

105

Poster Session C
the other half the color switched (boundary). Surprisingly, boundary trials
were rated as significantly shorter than constant trials. Together, these data
suggest that boundaries may have differential effects on memory depending on the interval length and the relational demands of the task. Importantly, to investigate the necessity of the hippocampus in temporal integration across boundaries, patients with damage to the medial temporal lobes
performed the two tasks. Preliminary data (N = 8 right ATL, 3 left ATL and
2 bilateral) suggest that hippocampal damage is associated with reduced
accuracy in temporal estimation. Medial temporal lobe volumetrics will be
used to specify the relationship between the extent of hippocampal damage
and temporal memory performance.

C76
ERRONEOUS RECONSTRUCTION OF PERCEPTUAL FRAGMENTS
IN MEMORY IS CONTEXTUALLY-DEPENDENT Manoj K. Doss1, Tallinn
E. Kiefer1, David A. Gallo1; 1University of Chicago — Recent research shows

that presenting people with perceptually fragmented pictures can result in
false recollections of intact object pictures that were not themselves seen
(Doss, Bluestone, & Gallo, in prep). In the current experiment, we investigated whether manipulating background context modulates this effect in a
time-dependent way. Inspired by hippocampal theory based on the binding of items in context (Diana, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2007), we manipulated context in a three-phase paradigm. During the study phase, participants viewed object labels and pictures overlaid onto scenes (target items),
and they also viewed object labels without pictures (lure items, e.g., the
word “lemon” on a beach). The misinformation phase aimed to distort participants’ memories for which pictures they had actually seen. Fragments of
perceptually similar exemplars to both targets and lures (e.g., orange, lime,
and grapefruit) were overlaid onto either a congruent scene (e.g. beach)
or an incongruent scene (e.g. forest). This phase took place either immediately after the study phase or 24 hours later, just prior to the cued recollection test. The test presented object labels as retrieval cues, and participants
indicated whether they recollected seeing an intact object picture from the
study phase. As predicted by hippocampal binding theory, we found that
the presentation of perceptually similar fragments on congruent contexts
selectively increased false recollection of nonstudied object pictures, compared to incongruent contexts. Moreover, this effect was only found when
the misinformation was delivered on the first day, suggesting that perceptual recombination may be driven by hippocampal consolidation.

C77
NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL MARKERS OF VALUATION ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH ACTIVE-LEARNING BENEFITS. Vishnu Murty1,
Sarah DuBrow1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — While much research

has investigated the mnemonic benefits of active learning, relatively less
research has investigated motivational and affective factors contribute to
active learning. One such factor that differs between active and passive
learning is an individuals’ sense of agency, i.e. the ability to make choices
and exert control over learning. Research has demonstrated that individuals value the opportunity to make choices, and perceived agency is associated with activation of the mesolimbic dopamine system. Given these
literatures, we investigated whether behavioral and neural markers of valuation were associated with active-learning benefits. Participants encoded
objects during a task that manipulated the opportunity to choose during
the collection of fMRI data (n = 20). Participants were shown displays with
two occluder screens that concealed to-be-encoded objects. Across conditions, we manipulated participants’ opportunity to choose which occluder
screen to reveal. Behaviorally, we found that memory was significantly
greater for objects when individuals chose which screen to reveal (p < 0.01).
To measure changes in valuation as a function of choice, participants rated
how much they ‘liked’ occluder screens prior to and following encoding.
Behaviorally, we found that change in valuation of occluder screens (postpre ratings) significantly predicted the benefits of active learning (p < 0.05).
FMRI connectivity analyses revealed that changes in intrinsic connectivity
between the striatum and orbitofrontal cortex during the ratings task (i.e.
functional coupling which is independent of task-related activation) predicted active-learning benefits. Together these findings suggest that active
learning via choice may recruit valuation systems to promote better learning.

106

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

C78
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN EXPECTED REWARD AND EMOTION
DURING ENCODING-RELATED BRAIN ACTIVITY Yi-Jhong Han1, Flávia
Schechtman Belham1, Leun J. Otten1; 1University College London (UCL) — Brain
activity before an event can predict whether the event will later be remembered. Such encoding-related activity has been demonstrated to be sensitive to two factors: anticipated reward and emotional valence of an upcoming event. In separate experiments, the prospect of a high monetary reward
or unpleasant event elicited widespread, positive encoding-related activity
in event-related potentials (ERPs). Here, we investigated how reward and
emotion interact during memory encoding. Scalp-recorded electrical brain
activity was acquired from healthy adults while they memorized unpleasant and neutral pictures. A cue presented 1.5 s before picture onset indicated the upcoming valence and amount of money that could be earned
if the picture was remembered in a later recognition test. People were
more likely to remember high than low reward pictures, and neutral than
unpleasant pictures. Frontally-distributed ERP activity before and after picture onset predicted later confident recognition. Surprisingly, a negative
modulation was observed before picture onset, which did not differ across
conditions. In contrast, the usually-observed positive subsequent memory
effect appeared after picture onset. For neutral pictures, this effect did not
differ across reward value. For unpleasant pictures, a subsequent memory
effect was found in the low, but not high, reward condition. These findings
suggest that (i) reward and emotion only interact once a picture has been
perceived, and (ii) the anticipatory processes observed here differ qualitatively from those seen when reward and emotion are studied in isolation.
One possibility is that participants focus on the meaning of an upcoming
picture in the current circumstances.

C79
DO OLD/NEW EFFECTS VARY WITH DIFFERENTIAL REACTION
TIMES TO NEW AND OLD ITEMS IN MEMORY EXCLUSION TASKS?
Timm Rosburg1, Mikael Johansson2, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland University, Germany, 2Lund Unversity, Sweden — In memory experiments, participants often

are requested to response as fast and as accurately as possible. This might
contribute to interindividual differences in response behavior that in turn
might also affect functional correlates of episodic retrieval. In our study,
data collected in three previous experiments using memory exclusion tasks
were re-analyzed in order to investigate whether retrieval accuracy and
old/new effects, as measured by event-related potentials, vary with differential reaction times (RTs) to correctly identified old items (target hits)
and to correctly rejected new items. Across all experiments, the RTs to correct rejections were shorter than the RTs to hits. The sample was divided
into participants with small and large mean differences between the two
kinds of RTs, with test conditions and the response hands being balanced
across the two subsamples. Behaviorally, participants with small RT differences identified significantly more targets than participants with large
RT differences. This effect was, however, offset by an increased false alarm
rate to nontargets. From 600 to 900 ms, old/new effects particularly over
right-frontal and right-central electrodes were significantly diminished (or
even reversed) in participants with large RT differences, as compared to
participants with small RT differences. Similarly, from 1200 to 1500 ms, differential RTs affected the topography of old/new effects, with diminished
right frontal old/new effects and increased late posterior negativities in
participants with large RT differences. The findings indicate that differential RTs to new and old items in memory exclusion tasks need to be considered when interpreting the aforementioned old/new effects.

C80
EFFECTS OF SUBJECTIVE VIVIDNESS ON THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MEMORY RETRIEVAL Jaclyn Ford1, John Morris1, Elizabeth
Kensinger1; 1Boston College, MA — Successful memory for an image can be

supported by retrieval of one’s personal reaction to the image (i.e., internal
vividness), as well as retrieval of the specific details of the image itself (i.e.,
external vividness). It is unclear whether these two measures of vividness
rely on the same neural processes. The current study examined the neural
recruitment and hippocampal connectivity associated with enhanced vividness during retrieval of emotional and neutral events. Participants (ages
18-85) encoded complex visual images paired with verbal titles. During a

2015 Annual Meeting
scanned retrieval session, they were presented with the titles and asked
whether each had been seen with an image during encoding. Following
retrieval of each image, participants were asked to rate internal and external vividness. Controlling for age, increased hippocampal activity was
associated with higher vividness ratings for both scales, supporting prior
evidence implicating the hippocampus in retrieval of memory detail. However, different patterns of hippocampal connectivity related to enhancing
external and internal vividness. External vividness was associated with
greater increases in hippocampal connectivity with ventral visual regions
than was internal vividness, while internal vividness was associated with
increased connectivity between the hippocampus and medial and lateral
prefrontal regions. Further, hippocampal connectivity with medial prefrontal regions was associated with increased ratings of internal vividness, but
with decreased ratings of external vividness. These findings suggest that
the hippocampus may contribute to increased internal and external vividness via distinct mechanisms and that external and internal vividness of
memories should be considered as separable measures.

C81
CORTICAL REINSTATEMENT OF RECENT AND REMOTE SOURCE
MEMORIES J Tyler Boyd-Meredith1, Anthony D Wagner1,2, Melina R Uncapher1;
1

Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 2Neurosciences Program, Stanford University — Remembering details associated with a retrieval cue is

known to elicit reinstatement of patterns of cortical activity present during
encoding, but it is unclear how this reactivation may change as a function
of study-test delay. Here we tested the prediction that levels of cortical reinstatement would remain constant across delay for accurate source judgments. To investigate this question, we conducted a long-term, longitudinal study of source memory in which participants encoded word-image
associations (i.e., a word paired with an object, face, or scene) at 8 months,
2 months, and 1 hour prior to a scanned memory test. At test, participants
were cued with words in order to retrieve associated source information: all
120 old words from each delay were interspersed with 120 lures, and participants indicated either memory for the source (object, face, scene), memory
for the word, or novelty. Behavioral analyses revealed that participants
were most likely to make accurate source memory judgments for recently
encoded words, and univariate analyses revealed that, contrary to our predictions, only recent source memories elicited significantly greater activity
in medial temporal lobe (MTL) and ventral temporal cortex (VTC) when
compared to item memories (accurate memory with no accompanying
source judgment). However, a linear pattern classifier trained on an independent, category localizer in VTC revealed that source hits demonstrated
levels of cortical reinstatement that did not vary across delay, suggesting
that equivalent levels of source evidence are present during accurate source
judgments, regardless of the age of the source memory.

C82
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SLEEP AND NEURAL AND BEHAVIORAL MARKERS OF MEMORY CONSOLIDATION Emily Cowan1, Anli
Liu2, Sanjeev Kothare2, Orrin Devinsky2, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University, 2NYU
Langone School of Medicine — Memory consolidation is hypothesized to

confer upon memory a resistance to forgetting that may be one consequence
of those memories becoming more distributed throughout the cortex. Sleep
has been linked with successful memory consolidation. In particular, features in the architecture of sleep have been demonstrated to be related to
sleep-dependent memory enhancements (Gais & Born, 2004; Takashima et
al., 2006). However, it remains unknown what aspects of sleep architecture
are related to the distribution of memory traces and the effect this has on
behavioral measures of forgetting. In a first behavioral experiment (N= 23),
we asked subjects to encode sets of word-image pairs, with an intervening period of overnight sleep (Sleep List) or a brief wakeful period (Awake
List), thus differing in the opportunity for potential consolidation. Cued
source recall was probed both immediately after the second presentation
and 24-hours later, providing a measure of forgetting. Behavioral analyses revealed that the information learned before sleep was better stabilized; subjects showed greater associative memory and less forgetting for
the Sleep List stimuli than the Awake List. To investigate the relationship
between that night’s sleep, behavioral measures of forgetting and neural
measures of brain connectivity, we collected overnight polysomnography,
and scanned subjects with fMRI while encoding the word-image pairs for

Poster Session C
the second time (N=10). Further analyses will correlate specific oscillatory
features of sleep with neural and behavioral markers of memory consolidation.

C83
THE HIPPOCAMPUS IS PREFERENTIALLY ASSOCIATED WITH
SPATIAL MEMORY FOR ITEMS IN THE LEFT VISUAL FIELD Brittany
M. Jeye1, Jessica M. Karanian1, Scott D. Slotnick1; 1Boston College — The hippocampus has long been known to play a role in processing spatial information. For instance, place cells in the rat hippocampus code for specific spatial
locations (O’Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971). Although the human hippocampus
has been associated with memory for context, coding for different spatial
locations has not, to our knowledge, been reported. In the present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, we evaluated whether
the hippocampus was differentially associated with the memory for items
presented in the left visual field or the right visual field. During encoding,
participants maintained central fixation and viewed abstract shapes in the
left or right visual field. During retrieval, the same shapes were presented
at fixation and participants classified each shape as previously on the “left”
or “right”. Activity associated with accurate spatial memory for shapes in
the left visual field was isolated by contrasting “left”/left > “right”/left
(i.e., hits > misses), while activity associated with accurate spatial memory
for shapes in the right visual field was isolated by contrasting “right”/right
> “left”/right. Preliminary analysis revealed that accurate spatial memory
for shapes in the left visual field produced activity in the hippocampus (p
< 0.001, corrected for multiple comparisons to p < 0.05). However, accurate
spatial memory for shapes in the right visual field did not produce activity
in the hippocampus, even at a reduced threshold (p < 0.01, uncorrected).
The present results suggest that the hippocampus may be preferentially
associated with spatial memory for items in the left visual field.

C84
MEMORY FOR SONGS FOLLOWING UNILATERAL TEMPORAL
LOBE EXCISION INCLUDING THE HIPPOCAMPUS Irene Alonso1,2,3,4,
Virginie Lambrecq2,3, Sophie Dupont2,3, Séverine Samson1,2; 1Laboratoire de
Neurosciences Fonctionnelles et Pathologies (EA 4559), Université Lille-Nord de
France, 2Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 3Centre de Recherche de l’Institut
du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière (ICM), UPMC - UMR 7225 CNRS - UMRS 975
INSERM, Paris, 4Department of Psychology, New York University — To remember

a song, lyrics and melodies need to be bound into a unified mental representation. A vast number of studies have shown that memory-binding
processes are related with hippocampal function. However, the role of the
hippocampus in the binding of songs remained to be established. We conducted a neuropsychological study to investigate the effects of unilateral
temporal lobe lesions including the hippocampus on binding lyrics with
melodies in memory. Patients with right (RTL) or left (LTL) temporal lobe
lesions were tested in a song recognition task, in which target songs had to
be recognized among mismatch songs (wrong combination of old melodies
and old lyrics), and new-lyrics songs (with old melodies). Given that both
old lyrics and old melodies were presented in target and mismatch songs,
this paradigm allows for the specific examination of binding by comparing recognition of these two types of songs. Our study confirms a deficit
in memory for lyrics in LTL patients. Although RTL patients recognized
lyrics better than LTL, they showed a deficit in lyrics recognition as compared to controls, suggesting an additional contribution of RTL when the
text is sung. The main finding of this study is that binding recognition is
similarly impaired following both LTL and RTL lesions. This is the first evidence supporting that bilateral hippocampus are necessary for song memory-binding process. Results are discussed in light of previous neuroimaging
findings and theoretical contexts in favor of the specific contribution of the
hippocampus in binding lyrics and melodies in songs.

C85
REMOTE SPATIAL MEMORY IN DEPRESSION Dhawal Selarka1,3, R.
Shayna Rosenbaum2,3, Brian Levine1,3; 1University of Toronto, 2York University,
Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest Hospital — Where verbal memory is

3

recognized as having episodic and semantic components, spatial memory
is also considered to have detailed (episodic-like) and schematic (semantic-like) components. When examining remote spatial memories (familiar

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

107

Poster Session C
routes or environments), several studies have noted that the detailed component seems to be impaired in patients with hippocampal damage, while
the schematic component remains relatively preserved. Spatial memory in
depression, another group found to have compromised hippocampal function, has rarely been studied. The aim of this study was to examine remote
spatial and episodic memory in depression using a novel internet paradigm
that was composed of spatial and autobiographical memory measures.
Items in the spatial memory measures incorporated a set of Toronto landmarks that were found to be familiar to participants in a previous study.
Initial results suggest that the novel internet battery was both feasible and
valid, indicating that the internet is a viable platform to test remote spatial and autobiographical memory. No differences between depressed and
non-depressed participants were found on measures of schematic spatial
memory, suggesting that this process is preserved in depression. There was
evidence for altered processing of detailed spatial memory in depression.
These preliminary results suggest that detailed, but not schematic spatial
memory is disrupted in depression.

C86
DOES SPATIAL CONTEXT COME FIRST? EXAMINING THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMORY Melissa Hebscher1,2, Brian Levine1,2, Asaf Gilboa1,2; 1Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest,
University of Toronto — Autobiographical memory (AM) unfolds over time,

2

but little is known about the temporal dynamics of its retrieval. A small
number of studies have identified early hippocampal activity during AM
construction, and early hippocampal activity has been shown to reflect spatial context reinstatement during memory retrieval in virtual reality environments. Taken together, these findings suggest that spatial representations are reinstated early in the construction of AM, however no studies to
date have examined this from a behavioural perspective. The present study
aimed to examine the temporal dynamics of AM and the role spatial information plays in retrieval. Using a novel paradigm, we cued participants
with personalized stimuli consisting of location and non-location cues, and
assessed the time taken to recall a memory, the first thing that came to mind
when recalling the event, and the vividness of the memory. We found that:
(1) Location cued memories were recalled more quickly than non-location
cued memories; (2) Participants were more likely to select a location as the
first thing that came to mind when recalling events cued by non-locations;
(3) The likelihood of selecting a location as the first thing that came to mind
was associated with better self-reported trait memory functioning as measured by the survey of autobiographical memory (SAM). These findings
demonstrate that spatial information plays an early and fundamental role
in memory retrieval and recollection, and that the experience of remembering can be manipulated by using different cues.

C87
VULNERABILITY TO OBJECT INTERFERENCE IN EARLY MILD
COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Celia Fidalgo1, Alana Changoor1, Morgan
Barense1,2, Andy Lee1,2; 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, ON, Canada — Persons with early mild

cognitive impairment (MCI) show atrophy in medial temporal lobe (MTL)
brain regions known to process objects, while scene processing regions are
left relatively intact. The MTL is believed to protect visual memories by
preventing irrelevant visual stimuli from intruding upon memory content.
The current study examined whether older adults at-risk for MCI would
show impaired recognition for objects compared to controls, and whether
this would be exacerbated by visual interference consisting of distracting
objects. Participants were classified as at-risk for MCI or healthy controls
according to the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA, Nasreddine et al.,
2005). Each trial began with the presentation of a study image of an object
overlaid on a scene. Participants then viewed distracting images: a stream
of five objects, scenes, or numbers. Finally, memory for the studied item
was tested with a forced-choice recognition decision for either the study
object (object recognition) or study scene (scene recognition). An analysis of
variance revealed a significant group difference on object recognition, with
post-hoc tests revealing that this was driven by the at-risk group performing significantly worse than controls on object recognition following object
interference. Additionally, accuracy in this condition was significantly correlated with MoCA scores. By contrast, there were no group differences
for scene recognition, nor were there effects of interference on scene rec-

108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
ognition. The results support the view that MTL atrophy damages object
representations, which leads to a vulnerability to visual interference that is
especially detrimental to visual memory for objects.

C88
ALTERED RECOLLECTIVE EXPERIENCE OF EPISODIC MEMORY IN
POSTPARTUM COGNITIVE DEFICIENCY Yoonjin Nah1, Na-Young Shin2,
Sehjung Yi1, Soo-Young Park1, Seung-Koo Lee2, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, 2Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea — Several

studies have suggested women’s subjective cognitive deficiency after giving
birth, so called ‘momnesia’, may result from hormonal change, stress, or
depression. To investigate whether there are qualitative alterations in recognition memory, 26 females on 3rd month after parturition (Postpartum,
PP) and 24 females who do not have any experience of pregnancy (Healthy
controls, HC) were recruited for Remember-Know decisions. Behaviorally,
there was an interaction between main effects of groups (PP, HC) and hit
rates in response types (Remember, Know), showing PP responded to old
items as ‘Know’ more often while ‘Remember’ less compared to HC. Contrasting Remember versus Know responses in each group for fMRI data
revealed medial/lateral PFC, hippocampus, angular, parietal, and precuneus were significantly more activated in HC, while PP showed decreased
activity within these regions; a direct comparison of two groups also confirmed the difference. Since hippocampus and precuneus play crucial roles
in episodic memory, we selected these two regions as ROIs and conducted
psycho-physiological interaction analysis to measure task-based functional
connectivities. Group comparisons revealed DLPFC, VLPFC, and temporal gyrus showed relatively decreased connectivities with hippocampus in
PP during recollection, whereas precueneus has attenuated connectivities
with PFC (BA 10, 47). Resting-state intrinsic functional connectivity analysis with the same seeds similarly revealed these regions were functionally
less connected with PFC (BA 11, 47), frontopolar (BA 10), middle frontal
gyrus (BA 46), and temporal gyrus. These findings suggest diminished process of recollective memory in PP is reflected in neuronal level, especially in
functional connectivities within core cognitive networks.

C89
THETA OSCILLATIONS TRACK THE CONTENT OF REPRESENTATIONS RETRIEVED FROM LONG TERM MEMORY David W. Sutterer1, David E. Anderson1, John T. Serences2, Edward K. Vogel1, Edward Awh1;
University of Oregon, 2University of California - San Diego — Recent work has

1

demonstrated that it is possible to reconstruct orientation selective channel tuning functions (CTFs) during the encoding and delay period of a
working memory (WM) task using a forward encoding model and electroencephalography (EEG). Specifically these CTFs can be derived from the
distribution of alpha-band (8-12hz) activity across the scalp (Anderson et
al. 2014), providing a high temporal resolution measure of the content and
quality of WM representations. The goal of the present work was to determine whether we could employ a similar approach to track the content of
representations retrieved from long term memory (LTM). Subjects (n = 24)
learned randomly assigned colors for a collection of 120 unique shapes,
with the color selected from a continuous 360 degree space. Twenty four
hours after the initial learning session, subjects were presented with shape
cues and asked to retrieve the associated color while EEG was recorded.
We found that robust color-selective CTFs could be obtained from the distribution of evoked theta-band (4-7 hz) activity during the first 400 ms of
the shape cue onset. Thus, while sustained activity in the alpha frequency
band has been shown to track the active contents of visual WM, the content
of representations retrieved from LTM is tracked by phasic activity in the
theta-frequency band. These findings dovetail with the longstanding consensus that low frequency activity in the theta band is integral to LTM function, and they provide a powerful new method for measuring the temporal
dynamics of LTM retrieval.

C90
SLEEP AFTER REACTIVATION PREDICTS EPISODIC MEMORY
UPDATING Natalie Bryant1, Lynn Nadel1, Richard R. Bootzin1, Rebecca L.
Gomez1; 1The University of Arizona — Memory reconsolidation occurs when
a previously-stabilized memory trace is reactivated, updated with novel
experiences, and restabilized in its new form. While sleep has been inves-

2015 Annual Meeting
tigated in memory consolidation in general, and procedural memory
updating in particular, its role in episodic memory reconsolidation remains
unknown. We hypothesized that sleep facilitates episodic memory updating. Twenty-five undergraduates tracked their sleep using actigraphy and
self-report during a week of testing. At Session 1, participants learned 20
objects. At Session 2, they were reminded of Session 1 (reactivation) and
learned 20 new objects. At Session 3, they were tested on their memory
for the day each object was learned (Session 1 or 2). In prior studies, learners frequently attributed Session 2 items to their Session 1 memory (intrusions), demonstrating updating of a prior memory with later learning.
Total sleep time (TST) significantly predicted number of these intrusions,
R2=.34, F(2,22)=5.75, p<.01. Less sleep after Session 1 (β=-.52, p<.05) and
more sleep after Session 2 (β=.52, p<.05) predicted the number of Session 2
objects attributed to Session 1. No relationships were found between TST
and Session 1 items misattributed to Session 2. Our findings show that
sleep facilitates reconsolidation of a prior memory after reactivation and
new learning. Interestingly, memories not fully consolidated by sleep are
more susceptible to reactivation and updating. Sleep’s effect was specific to
reconsolidation; sleep did not affect misattributions in the other direction.
These results are an important first contribution to understanding how
sleep contributes to episodic memory reconsolidation.

C91
PREPARATORY EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS) PREDICT
EPISODIC RETRIEVAL ACCURACY. Jane E. Herron1, Edward L. Wilding1,
Lisa H. Evans1; 1Cardiff University — ERPs recorded from frontal electrodes

are more positive-going when participants are preparing to retrieve episodic information than when preparing to complete a baseline task with
no episodic demand. This activity has been characterised as a correlate of
retrieval mode, a tonically maintained mental state which ensures stimuli
are processed primarily as cues for episodic retrieval. This preparatory
neural activity has not yet been linked directly, however, with subsequent
retrieval accuracy. It is important to do this in order to understand the functional role played by preparation in episodic memory retrieval. Here, participants were presented with words and were cued prior to each test word
to prepare to complete an episodic memory task (retrieve left/right screen
location of the word at study) or a perceptual task (top/middle/bottom
screen location judgment). Each cue-type was presented for two consecutive trials, and averaged ERPs were formed both for the first (switch) and
second (stay) trials. In keeping with common findings in the task-switching literature, participants responded more quickly on stay than on switch
trials. ERPs associated with the episodic preparatory cue diverged from
ERPs associated with the perceptual cue on switch trials only. This difference comprised a sustained positivity over frontal scalp for episodic
cues, resembling closely previous results. ERPs elicited by the preparatory
episodic cues were also reliably different on switch trials when separated
according to the accuracy of the subsequent study location judgment, indicating, for the first time, that preparatory retrieval potentials predict the
accuracy of episodic memory decisions.

C92
ASSOCIATIVE NOVELTY BINDING IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS
Elise P. Gagnon1, Donna J. Bridge, Joel L. Voss; 1Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine — Episodic memories are constantly evolving to adapt to

ever-changing contexts and circumstances. One mechanism important for
memory modification is associative novelty binding (ANB), whereby existing memory representations are updated to incorporate new information.
We have previously shown that the hippocampus is selectively involved
in behavioral and eye-movement patterns associated with ANB. Here, we
evaluated the effects of cognitive aging on ANB, with the hypothesis that
age-related memory impairment could involve disruption of ANB. Young
(n=16) and older (n=18) adults studied object-locations on context background scenes. Then, subjects completed a refresh task with new context
backgrounds, in which they either actively recalled the object-locations or
passively placed objects in predetermined locations. Finally, subjects completed recognition tests in which they attempted to choose each object’s
associated location among the original location, the updated refresh location, and a new lure location. ANB occurred to a similar extent in both
age groups, such that subjects chose the updated location following active
retrieval, and the original location following passive refresh. However,
older adults demonstrated an overall impairment on the recognition test

Poster Session C
following passive refresh, in that the new lure location significantly interfered with memory of the original location. Interestingly, although behavior differed significantly across groups in the passive condition, eye movements showed similar memory effects. These results suggest preservation
of ANB in aging, as well as disconnect between explicit memory judgments
and eye-movement memory measures in older adults. These findings have
implications for understanding memory and hippocampal impairment in
healthy aging.

C93
THE EFFECT OF REWARD ON MEMORY SPECIFICITY Malia Anderson1, MaryJo Talley1, Brock Kirwan1; 1Brigham Young University — Recognition
memory performance is often better when a reward is offered in exchange
for good memory performance than when no reward is offered. However,
it is unclear if reward per se modulates memory encoding or if reward acts
indirectly on memory performance by increasing participant motivation to
remember. In this study, participants were given a two-card selection task
and informed that their memory would be tested for the objects depicted
on the cards. In the immediate condition, participants were informed that
they were being rewarded immediately for selecting a subset of stimuli.
In the delayed condition, participants were informed that they would be
rewarded for remembering a subset of the stimuli. Consistent with previous literature, we hypothesized that memory for subsequently rewarded
stimuli would be better in the delayed condition. Further, we hypothesized
that memory performance would be better for stimuli that were rewarded
in the immediate condition, even though participants had no overt reason
to differentially encode the rewarded items. We found that recognition
(as measured by hit rates) was higher in the delayed condition for both
rewarded and non-rewarded stimuli compared to the immediate condition.
However, we found that memory specificity (as measured by correct rejection rates) was improved in the immediate condition relative to the delayed
condition, particularly as target-foil similarity increased. These results indicate that reward may enhance memory specificity.

C94
EXPLORE TO LEARN – LEARN TO EXPLORE: INFLUENCES OF PASSIVELY OBSERVED EXPLORATION STRATEGIES ON SELF-GENERATED EXPLORATION AND LEARNING Lakshmi Karuparthy1, Jane
X. Wang1, Joel L. Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
— Optimal learning requires exploration for relevant information. There-

fore, exploration strategies and learning are interdependent. We have previously shown that learning is enhanced when subjects utilize strategies
that maximize information intake via prolonged exploration of specific
information sources early during learning (Wang & Voss, Neuron 2014).
However, it is unclear whether exposure to exploration strategies can
bias the strategies subjects implement. In the current experiment, subjects
(N=24) passively observed optimal or suboptimal strategies before being
given the opportunity to generate their own exploration strategies in an
active condition. Optimal strategies involved persistent sampling of information to maximize information intake early during learning, whereas
suboptimal strategies involved random sampling of information. Learning
was particularly influenced by the type of strategy observed first, with the
greatest improvements in later memory for viewing the optimal strategy
first. Importantly, this improvement was associated with adoption of the
optimal learning strategy, whereby subjects who viewed this strategy first
actively performed it when given control of exploration, relative to subjects
who viewed the suboptimal strategy first. These findings suggest that subjects are sensitive to the initial presentation of exploration patterns during
learning, and that simple observation of optimal strategies can provide
templates for behavior that are subsequently followed when given control
over the learning process, leading to improved learning. Relevance to theories of memory monitoring and control as well as to the development of
effective instructional settings will also be discussed.

C95
MODIFYING THE QUALITY OF EPISODIC MEMORY VIA INTERFERENCE WITH RECONSOLIDATION Liat Pell1, Yadin Dudai1; 1Weizmann
Institute of Science, Israel — Reconsolidation refers to an amnesia-susceptible consolidation process that is initiated by cued reactivation of long-term
memory. Modification of declarative memory through reconsolidation in
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

109

Poster Session C

2015 Annual Meeting

humans has been shown mainly by updating the previous retrieved knowledge with new information that is related to the older one. We investigated
whether episodic memory could be modified via reconsolidation by new
learning which does not involve apparent updating. Subjects studied and
were tested on narrative movie clips, which 48h later were allocated to
three conditions: cued-reactivation, cued-reactivation followed by learning
new clips unrelated to the reactivated ones, or no reactivation. The final
memory performance relative to the initial one was lower for clips that
were not reactivated and for clips of which the reactivation was followed
by new learning, compared with clips of which the reconsolidation was
uninterrupted. Moreover, the new learning following cued-reactivation
resulted in a qualitative impairment of memory, rendering it less detailed
and preserving its gist. Thus, interference with reconsolidation by new
learning can impair memory performance even if the new memorandum
does not update the original one. Furthermore, the main effect of this kind
of interference is decreasing the quality of memory in terms of richness
and accuracy, even to a greater extent than the decay of memory without
reactivation does. This effect may be interpreted in the context of the transformation that episodic memory traces undergo over time, from memories
which are rich in details, to semantic, gist-only versions.

found stronger connectivity of PRC with anterior-lateral EC, whereas PHC
showed higher connectivity with posterior-medial EC. Moreover, anterior-lateral and posterior-medial EC subregions showed preferential connectivity with proximal vs. distal subiculum, respectively. Our data provide
the first evidence that the human EC can be divided into functional subdivisions along the anterior-posterior and lateral-medial axis whose patterns of
functional connectivity closely parallel the known anatomical connectivity
patterns of the lateral and medial EC in rodents. The present results have
implications for neurobiological theories of memory and for understanding
the clinical impact of localized EC damage in the early stages of neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease.

C96
MODULATION OF MEMORY PROCESSING BY ATTENTIONAL
GOALS Lynn Lohnas1, Lila Davachi1; 1New York University — Encoding and

debilitating condition affecting quality of life. It has frequently been conceptualized as comprising mental fatigue and physical fatigue. We wished
to determine the brain regions whose volumes correlated with subjective
measures of mental and physical fatigue following mild TBI in 24 recently
deployed military service members. Methods: High-resolution MRI images
were segmented, normalized, modulated, and smoothed (8x8x8) using
SPM12. The resulting volumes, along with measures of mental and physical
fatigue from the Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI; Smets, 1995),
were analyzed. MFI mental fatigue is a measure of the inability to concentrate, while MFI physical fatigue is a measure of self-reported strength and
conditioning. Age was included as a covariate of no interest. Results: Correlations were found between increased MFI mental fatigue and decreased
normalized, modulated brain volume in left inferior frontal and right
middle frontal regions. Physical fatigue was also correlated with a decrease
in the right middle frontal region, along with clusters in the lingual and
middle occipital gyri. Conclusions: Both mental and physical fatigue were
associated with brain volume loss in mTBI veterans in right middle frontal regions. Cognitive fatigue scores, similar to mental fatigue, were previously shown to be associated with cortical thicknesses of superior, middle,
and inferior frontal gyri in MS patients (Calabrese et al., 2010). The middle
frontal region is considered part of an attentional network (Calabrese et al.,
2010). Fatigue can cause significant distress and has detrimental impacts on
daily functioning and overall well-being (Ouellet, 2006).

retrieval of episodic memories depend not only on the information being
processed, but also on how that information relates to previously formed
memories and task demands. In a continuous recognition paradigm,
memory processing requires switching between encoding novel representations and retrieving prior representations. We examined the neural
correlates of such switches in processing using a continuous recognition
paradigm, while recording electrocorticography (ECoG) activity (n=5). Specifically, participants performed two versions of the paradigm in a blocked
design. In the ‘details’ task, participants indicated whether they had seen
this exact image before (‘old’), whether they had seen a similar but not identical version of this image (‘similar’) or whether the item was entirely new
(‘new’). In the ‘generalize’ task, participants only distinguished between
‘old’ and ‘new’ items; a ‘similar’ item was considered ‘old’ inasmuch as it
shared a majority of features with a previously presented item. We examined how attentional goals modulated episodic memory processing by comparing ECOG activity based on (1) bottom-up goals reflecting the stimulus
type and the participant’s response; (2) top-down goals that required distinguishing between the generalize task and the (more challenging) details
task. In the details task, gamma power in the hippocampus and ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was significantly greater during
presentation of similar items than old items. In addition, gamma power in
prefrontal cortex was significantly greater for similar than new items. Our
results dissociate between the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex based on
episodic memory processing demands.

C97
FUNCTIONAL SUBDIVISIONS OF THE HUMAN ENTORHINAL
CORTEX Anne Maass1,2, David Berron1,2, Laura Libby3, Charan Ranganath3,4,
Emrah Düzel1,2; 1Institute of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia Research,
Otto-von-Guericke-University, Germany, 2German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases (DZNE), Site Magdeburg, Germany, 3Department of Psychology, University of California at Davis, 4Center for Neuroscience, University of California
at Davis — The entorhinal cortex (EC) is a major gateway between the neocortex and the hippocampus. Evidence from studies in rodents suggests a
functional distinction between the lateral and medial EC, based on differential connectivity with perirhinal (PRC) vs parahippocampal cortex (PHC)
and differential connectivity with hippocampal subfields (i.e. subiculum
and CA1) along the proximo-distal (transverse) axis. However, anatomical
studies have not reported such a distinction in nonhuman primates, and
virtually nothing is known about the connectivity structure of the human
EC. If there are functional subdivisions of the human EC, available evidence
suggests that the primary differences could lie along the anterior-posterior
(longitudinal) axis. To identify functional subdivisions of the human EC,
we used ultra-high field functional magnetic resonance imaging at 7 Tesla
(with 0.8 mm isotropic resolution), and analyzed intrinsic functional connectivity within the EC. In two independent samples (N1 = 15, N2 = 14), we

110

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

NEUROANATOMY
C98
NEURAL COORDINATES OF FATIGUE IN MILD TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURED WAR VETERANS Kris Knutson1, Michael Tierney1, Jeffrey Lewis1,
Eric Wassermann1; 1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland — Objectives: Fatigue is a

C99
SYNERGISTIC VOLUME CHANGES IN GREY AND WHITE MATTER
NETWORKS ACROSS CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE Signe
Bray1, Mark Krongold1, Cassandra Cooper1; 1University of Calgary — Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown that cortical development is
non-linear, that different regions exhibit unique maturational trajectories,
and that grey matter contraction across adolescence is accompanied by an
increase in white matter volume. Across the adult population, properties
of cortical grey matter co-vary within networks, which may also represent
organizational units for development and degeneration. However, the relationship between network development of cortical grey matter and volume
changes in white matter remains poorly characterized. To address this
question we used T1-weighted MR images from 360 unique participants
from the NIH MRI study of normal brain development, aged 4.8-18.5y.
Images were processed through a voxel-based morphometry pipeline
using a custom DARTEL template. Linear effects of age on grey and white
matter volume were modeled within four age bins, each including 90 participants (45 male): 4-8y, 8-10.5y, 10.5-14y, 14-18.5y. Grey and white matter
age-slope maps were separately divided into clusters using k-means, to
identify regions with similar age-slopes across the four age-bins. This procedure identified posterior, fronto-insular, sensorimotor and cerebellar
grey matter networks with corresponding white matter networks. While
from ages > 8y white matter age-slopes were generally positive and grey
matter generally negative, within adjacent grey and white matter networks
age-slopes followed parallel trajectories. This suggests that grey matter
contraction with age is accompanied by white matter volume expansion

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session C

within specific networks, and that white matter volume networks could
be a target for studying patterns of atypical brain development in clinical
populations.

to reveal differences in structural brain mechanisms associated with performance on a state-wide standardized math test that has significant implications for an individual’s ongoing education.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic

C102
APPETITE MODULATES INSULA FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY

C100
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HIPPOCAMPAL VISCOELASTICITY AND RELATIONAL MEMORY PERFORMANCE IN HEALTHY
YOUNG ADULTS: A MAGNETIC RESONANCE ELASTOGRAPHY
STUDY Hillary Schwarb1, Curtis L. Johnson1, Matthew D. J. McGarry2, Neal J.

Hazel Wright1, Xiaoyun Li1, Nicholas B. Fallon1, Rebecca Crookall1, Timo Giesbrecht2, Anna Thomas2, Jason C.G. Halford1, Joanne Harrold1, Andrej Stancak1;
1
University of Liverpool, 2Unilever R&D — Insula cortex activation is repeatedly

Cohen1; 1Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College
— Investigation of the structure-function relationship between hippocam-

pus and memory has a long and rich history, with multiple lines of evidence demonstrating the importance of hippocampal integrity in successful
memory performance. The introduction of a novel neuroimaging technique
– magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) – allows us, for the first time, to
explore the mechanical properties of brain tissue as an index of brain health
in vivo. Until recently, however, MRE methods lacked sufficient resolution
necessary to accurately examine specific neuroanatomical structures in the
brain, and thus precluded the ability to use this method to further explore
structural relationships with function. In this study, we took advantage of
developments in MRE spatial resolution to measure the stiffness and viscosity of the human hippocampus, and investigated how these properties
contribute to hippocampal function. In this study, we acquired structural
MRI and high-resolution MRE scans from twenty right-handed male (ages
18-33) participants. Participants also completed both standard neuropsychological assessments of memory as well as sensitive experimental measures of relational memory performance. Hippocampal volume did not correlate with either standard neuropsychological measures or experimental
measures of relational memory. Relative hippocampal viscosity, however,
showed a strong relationship with relational memory performance, but
not with standard neuropsychological measures of memory. This study
demonstrates, for the first time, that we can extract reliable measures of viscoelasticity in the hippocampus using MRE, and it shows that these measures of brain health are significantly associated with memory performance
using sensitive behavioral tasks.

NEUROANATOMY
C101
NEUROANATOMICAL CORRELATES OF PERFORMANCE IN
STATE-WIDE TEST OF MATH ACHIEVEMENT Eric D. Wilkey1, Gavin R.
Price1, Laurie E. Cutting1; 1Peabody College, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee — This study investigates the relation between gray matter den-

sity and mathematical ability as measured by a statewide test of math
achievement in typically developing children. Previous research suggests
that increased functional activation of parietal brain regions (e.g. Angular
Gyrus, Intraparietal Sulcus) during numerical processing tasks is related to
higher math competence. Despite mounting evidence regarding the functional relevance of these regions, relatively little is known about the relation
between their structural architecture and math competence. Studies that
have related structural brain features to numerical and mathematical competence have used either basic number processing or standardized math
batteries as outcome variables. This study is the first to assess the relation between grey matter density and math achievement using a measure
administered in school at the state-wide level. In a sample of 51 typically
developing students (mean age = 11.3, grade = 5.8) we tested for differences
in grey matter density according to performance on the end-of-year TCAP
test (Tennessee Comprehensive Assessment Program). After controlling for
age, global brain volume, and verbal IQ, results showed that those student
who score “proficient” or “advanced” (n = 34) had increased grey matter
density in the left Angular Gyrus and left Superior Frontal Gyrus compared
to those student who scored “basic” or “below basic” (n = 17) (p <.001,
uncorrected, minimum cluster extent 138 voxels). These results are the first

observed in appetite studies. It contains receptor sites for peptides and
hormones controlling energy balance, and encompasses multi-functional
subregions which display differential anatomical and functional connectivities with the rest of the brain. Our study aimed to analyse the effect of
fasting and satiation on the functional connectivity profiles of left and right
anterior, middle, and posterior insula subregions. We hypothesised that the
profiles would be altered alongside changes in homeostatic energy balance.
19 healthy participants with a normal body mass index underwent two
7-minute resting state fMRI scans, one when fasted and one when satiated.
Functional connectivity between the left posterior insula and cerebellum /
superior frontal gyrus was stronger during fasting, while functional connectivity between the right middle insula and default mode structures (left
and right posterior parietal cortex, cingulate cortex) was stronger during
satiation. Differences in blood glucose levels between the scans contributed
to increased functional connectivity between the left posterior insula and
superior frontal gyrus during fasting, and between right middle insula and
cingulate cortex during satiation. Left posterior insula seems to form part of
a circuit prompting eating when there is an acute deficit in the homeostatic
energy balance, whilst right middle insula contributes to the default mode
network during satiety.

C103
VIRTUAL DISSECTION OF A SUBCORTICAL PATHWAY BETWEEN
THE SUPERIOR COLLICULUS AND AMYGDALA WITH DTI TRACTOGRAPHY: CONNECTIVITY STRENGTH CORRELATES WITH A
BIAS TO ORIENT TOWARD THREAT Kristin Koller1, Robert Rafal1; 1Bangor
University — DTI tractography has demonstrated connections between the

superior colliculus (SC) and pulvinar, and between the pulvinar and amygdala (Tammietto, Pullens, De Gelder, Weiskrantz & Goebel, 2012) that
could represent a putative subcortical pathway allowing fast and unconscious responses to threat. Here we used probabilistic tractography to
virtually dissect an isolated streamline connecting the SC with the amygdala through the pulvinar, and show that the connectivity strength of this
streamline correlates with a bias to orient toward threatening stimuli. In
twelve healthy human adults, DTI tractography dissections were achieved
with seed masks drawn in the amygdala, and waypoint masks drawn in the
pulvinar and SC. In a temporal order saccade choice task, participants were
presented pairs of pictures in left and right visual fields (one threatening
and one pleasant) and were instructed to look at the stimulus that onset
first across three stimulus onset asynchronies; 17ms between left-first/
right-first stimulus onset, and simultaneous stimulus onset. Streamlines
connecting the superior colliculus, pulvinar and lateral amygdala were
successfully demonstrated bilaterally in all twelve participants. In the critical forced-choice simultaneous stimulus onset condition, an overall bias to
saccade toward threat was observed. Finally, stronger pathway connectivity in the right hemisphere SC-pulvinar-amygdala streamline (indexed by
fractional anisotropy) correlated with a stronger threat bias across individuals. This is the first direct evidence supporting the functional veracity of a
subcortical threat-mediating pathway in healthy humans.

C104
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS OF CONTRALESIONAL HIPPOCAMPAL
VOLUME AS A PREDICTOR FOR SURVIVAL IN A SUBSET OF GLIOBLASTOMA MULTIFORME PATIENTS C. Paula de los Angeles1, Joshua
Jacobs1, Kristin Swanson1, Lei Wang1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine — Background: Patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)

brain tumors provide a clinical population for studying the brain structural response to a lesion. GBM patients survive a median of 15 months
with a small subset living longer than five years. However, little is known
about what brain and tumor factors relate to survival length and function-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

111

Poster Session C
ing. This study assesses cognitive neural compensation by examining the
contralesional hippocampus in GBM patients. Methods: Pre-treatment T1
with contrast images from 20 GBM patients with left-hemisphere tumor
were analyzed. Contralesional (i.e., right) hippocampal volume was determined using Freesurfer-Initiated Large-Deformation Diffeomorphic Metric
Mapping. Pre-treatment Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) scores, a
measure of patient functioning, as well as days of survival were correlated
with hippocampal volumes. Statistical analyses were done in SPSS. Results:
Volume of the right hippocampus was negatively correlated with days
of survival (r=-0.63, p=.003, n=20), even after controlling for intracranial
volume (p=.004). Pre-treatment KPS score negatively correlated with right
hippocampal volume (r=-0.50, p=.030, n=18). Volume of the left hippocampus was negatively correlated with days of survival (r=-0.55, p=.012, n=20),
even after controlling for intracranial volume (p=.015). Pre-treatment KPS
score did not correlate with left hippocampus volume (r=-0.39, p=.11,
n=18). Conclusion: This preliminary analysis shows that reduced contralesional, and to a lesser degree, ipsi-lesional, hippocampal volume was
correlated with increased survivorship and functioning in patients with
GBM. Inclusion of GBM tumor size and growth rate characteristics would
be an important next step in understanding the factors affecting plasticity
in unaffected brain regions in GBM patients.

C105
AN ANALYSIS OF TEMPORAL LOBE PROJECTION FIBERS IN TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Vatche G. Baboyan1, Emily L. Dennis1, Yan Jin1, Liang
Zhan1, Talin Babikian2, Christopher C. Giza3, Robert Asarnow4, Paul M. Thompson1; 1Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, USC
Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 2Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, UCLA,
3
UCLA Brain Injury Research Center, ChildrenDept of Neurosurgery and Division
of Pediatric Neurology, Mattel’s Hospital, Los Angeles, 4Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human
Behavior, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA — Temporal lobe white-matter fibers are

vulnerable to damage following traumatic brain injury (TBI). In the present
study, we analyzed neuropsychological and diffusion weighted (HARDI
sequence, 65-directions) data for 35 post-acute TBI participants (26 males,
avg age=13.94±2.9) and 31 controls (20 males, avg age=15.18±3). Multi-atlas
based fiber clustering was performed on whole-brain tractography data to
extract major temporal projection fibers, a method recently developed by
our lab. We examined the Uncinate Fasciculus (UF), Inferior Fronto-Occipital Fasciculus (IFOF), Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus (ILF), and Cingulum Fibers (CF), bilaterally. Only the left Arcuate fasciculus (L-ArcF) was
included. We performed between-group comparisons examining tract-wise
fractional anisotropy (FA) measures (aim 1) as well as overall relationships
between cognitive function and white matter structure (aim 2). To facilitate
regression analyses between neuropsychological scores and microstructural properties (FA), 4 primary cognitive domains were extracted from
the data: Language, Processing Speed, Executive Functioning, and Verbal
Memory. Element-wise linear regression was used to test for group differences in tract-wise FA (aim 1) and for testing the relationship between
tract structure and cognitive function (aim 2), while covarying for age and
gender in both analyses. Significant (p<0.001, FDR corrected) group differences in mean FA were found in the IFOF, ILF, and UF exclusively in the
left hemisphere. The right hemisphere UF was the only contralateral tract
showing between-group differences. Only the Left UF showed significant
associations with both Executive Functioning and Memory Scores (p<0.001,
corrected). Together, this data implicates the involvement of temporal lobe
projections in TBI and its neuropsychological sequelae.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
C106
GRAPH THEORY AND BEHAVIORAL STUDIES ON AUDITORY INTEGRATION Mary Kathryn Abel1,2, Hui Charles Li2,3, Gottfried Schlaug2,3, Psyche
Loui4; 1Harvard College, 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 3Harvard Medical School, 4Wesleyan University — In this study, we asked how individual dif-

ferences in pitch perception relate to audiovisual processing abilities, and to
small-world network properties of the brain. 10 tone-deaf (TD) subjects and

112

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
10 matched controls underwent resting-state functional MRI. Graph theory
analyses were performed on pairwise functional correlations. Results
showed that TD subjects had lower degrees, clustering, strength, and local
efficiency of functional correlations across the whole brain compared to
controls. Notably, TD subjects showed significantly increased clustering
scores (p=0.048) and local efficiency (p=0.047) in the right occipital lobe,
suggesting a potential visual compensatory mechanism. We then examined
the effect of pitch perception in audiovisual processing, as moderated by
factors including age of onset and years of musical training. Given pointlight displays of singers producing sung intervals, 55 subjects with a range
of pitch perception abilities made subjective ratings of the size of sung
intervals. Subjects were given audiovisual, audio-only, and visual-only
stimuli of the sung intervals. Additionally, the audiovisual stimuli were
divided into “congruent” (auditory and visual stimuli were unchanged)
and “incongruent” (auditory and visual stimuli were mismatched) stimuli. Multiple regression revealed that age of onset was the only independent predictor of incongruent audio scores (p=0.027). These results suggest
that while pitch discrimination plays a role in audiovisual integration, age
of onset is the most reliable predictor of the use of auditory information
in resolving audiovisual incongruence. These findings open the door for
future research concerning audiovisual integration and the effects of the
critical period of musical training on this integration.

C107
CORTICAL OSCILLATIONS IN THE AUDITORY SYSTEM TRACK
IRREGULAR FREQUENCY MODULATION WITH A 1/F MODULATION SPECTRUM Xiangbin Teng1, David Poeppel1; 1Department of Psychology, New York University — The auditory system operates on different
timescales to extract acoustic information from natural sounds, such as
speech and music, with a 1/f modulation spectrum. The neural mechanisms underlying this multi-scale processing are debated. Previous studies
mainly used sounds having a modulation rate within a specific frequency
range and found that cortical oscillations of the corresponding frequency
band in the auditory system can track acoustic dynamics. Such data may
not reflect an intrinsic auditory processing mode. Here we use stimuli
having 1/f modulation spectra with exponents at 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2, which
correspond to modulation spectra of environmental noise, music, speech,
and some vocalizations (Singh & Theunissen, 2003; Voss & Clarke, 1978).
To track these stimuli, the auditory system may use cortical oscillations of
multiple frequency bands and may reflect multi-scale processing. While
undergoing magnetoencephalographic (MEG) recording, participants listened to stimuli. MEG results show that theta band oscillations (3 – 7 Hz)
track the stimulus with an 1/f exponent of 1 even if the temporal modulation is not regular. There is no phase tracking in the theta band when the
1/f exponent is 0, and moderate phase tracking when the 1/f exponent is
2. The results also show moderate phase tracking in the gamma band (25
– 40 Hz) when the 1/f exponent is 1. The study suggests that multi-scale
processing is a basic property of audition.

C108
A VOXEL-BASED MORPHOMETRY STUDY OF RHYTHM PERCEPTION AND SYNCHRONIZATION H. Charles Li1,2, Shinya Fujii1,2,3, Psyche
Loui4, Gottfried Schlaug1,2; 1Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 2Harvard Medical School, 3University of Toronto, 4Wesleyan University — Rhythmic synchroni-

zation to complex external stimulus, such as music, involves a network of
brain regions that subserve temporal analysis and entrainment including
the cerebellum, basal ganglia, and auditory-motor mapping regions. The
present study investigates structural neural correlates of rhythm perception and production using combined behavioral and voxel-based morphometry methods. Forty subjects performed a series of rhythm-related
tasks in the Harvard Beat Assessment Test (HBAT; Fujii & Schlaug, 2013).
The battery consists of three rhythm perception tasks, where subjects have
to judge whether a rhythmic pattern is getting faster or slower, and four
rhythm production tasks, where subjects have to synchronize to a rhythmic
pattern by tapping their index finger on a drum pad. Results from behavioral testing provided a range of rhythm perception and production threshold scores for subjects. Subsequently, subjects underwent a structural MRI
(T1) scan, and voxel-based morphometry analysis was done in SPM8 to
assess correlations between gray matter signal and rhythm perception and
production threshold scores. Results showed a correlation between rhythm

2015 Annual Meeting
production scores and gray matter in the right posterior middle temporal gyrus (pMTG): superior behavioral performers had higher gray matter
signal in this cluster. These results suggest that beat synchronization integrates sensory information over time and that this process might involve
more right than left temporal regions, in particular for the time intervals
that were part of our test battery. Our findings are also in agreement with
the asymmetric sampling in time hypothesis (Poeppel, 2003) attributing different time integration functions to both temporal lobes.

C109
THE PHASE OF NEURAL OSCILLATIONS TRACKS IMAGINED
SINGING AT DISTINCT FREQUENCIES Xing Tian1,2, Huo Luo3, Gregory
B. Cogan2, David Poeppel2,4; 1New York University Shanghai, 2New York University, 3Chinese Academy of Science, 4Max Planck Institute (MPIEA) — Strong evi-

dence indicates that the timing of neural oscillations reflects the processing
of exogenous stimuli, but the mechanisms, for example regarding phase
coherence, are debated: does consistent stimulation alone drive oscillatory
coherence across trials, or do intrinsic oscillations actively interact with the
external stimulation, by way of some internal representation? The question
is difficult to answer in canonical stimulus-response paradigms, because
of the interaction between the properties of the stimuli and the subsequent
neurocognitive processes. To address this issue, we use mental imagery,
which is a purely top-down process that avoids external stimulation, to
investigate whether the phase of neural oscillations tracks completely internally induced representations. We asked participants to imagine singing
familiar songs while recording neural responses using magnetoencephalography (MEG). Analyses in source space revealed that the phase of neural
oscillations reflected the syllabic rate of singing imagery (1-3 Hz) in a distributed motor-sensory network. More interestingly, phase tracking also
occurred in right early auditory cortices and superior temporal sulcus in
the theta band (4-8 Hz), outside the syllabic rate of imagery. Using a mental
imagery paradigm to dissociate the contributions of physical stimulation
and subsequent neural representation, we provide the first evidence suggesting that top-down induced representations can induce reliable and specific temporal patterns in neural oscillations. Moreover, phase coherence in
the absence of a driving frequency supports the active role of theta band
neural oscillations in the formation of speech related representations.

C110
TONE-LANGUAGE SPEAKERS SHOW HEMISPHERIC SPECIALIZATION AND DIFFERENTIAL CORTICAL PROCESSING OF CONTOUR
AND INTERVAL CUES FOR PITCH Wei-Lun Chung1, Gavin M. Bidelman1;
1
University of Memphis — Electrophysiological studies demonstrate that the
neural coding of pitch is modulated by language experience and the linguistic relevance of the auditory input; both rightward and leftward asymmetries have been observed in the hemispheric specialization for pitch. In
music, pitch is encoded using two primary features: contour (patterns of
rises and falls) and interval (frequency separation between tones) cues.
Recent evoked potential studies demonstrate that these “global” (contour)
and “local” (interval) aspects of pitch are processed automatically (but
bilaterally) in trained musicians. Here, we examined whether alternate
forms of pitch expertise, namely, tone-language experience (i.e., Chinese),
influence the early detection of contour and intervallic deviations within
ongoing pitch sequences. Neuroelectric mismatch negativity (MMN)
potentials were recorded in Chinese speakers and English-speaking nonmusicians in response to continuous pitch sequences with occasional
global or local deviations in the ongoing melodic stream. This paradigm
allowed us to explore potential cross-language differences in the hemispheric weighting for contour and interval processing of pitch. Chinese
speakers showed larger MMNs for both pitch contour and interval deviants
than English-speaking nonmusicians across the board. However, Chinese
speakers also showed differential pitch encoding between hemispheres
not observed in English-speaking nonmusicians; Chinese speakers’ MMNs
revealed a rightward bias for contour processing but a leftward hemispheric laterality for interval processing. In contrast, no asymmetries were
observed in English-speaking nonmusicians. Collectively, our findings
suggest tone-language experience sensitizes auditory brain mechanisms
for the detection of subtle global/local pitch changes in the auditory stream
and exaggerates functional asymmetries in pitch processing between cerebral hemispheres.

Poster Session C

C111
THE AUDITORY SYSTEM MAY TEMPORALLY SUB-SAMPLE ITS
INPUTS, BUT ONLY ON A HIERARCHICALLY HIGH LEVEL OF PROCESSING Benedikt Zoefel1,2, Naveen Reddy Pasham3, Rufin VanRullen1,2; 1Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 2Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition, CNRS, Toulouse, France, 3Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar,
Odisha, India — Recent research suggests that the visual system does not con-

tinuously monitor the environment, but rather samples it, cycling between
‘snapshots’ at discrete moments in time. Interestingly, most attempts at
discovering discrete perception in the auditory system failed. These failures could reflect a crucial difference between vision and audition: whereas
vision mainly relies on spatial information, time might be the most important factor for audition. Thus, directly subsampling the auditory environment might prove detrimental for the brain, as essential information for the
extraction of auditory features would be lost. There is, however, an alternative: auditory subsampling might exist, but on a hierarchically higher level
of processing, after the extraction of auditory features has been completed.
To underline our assumption, we constructed speech stimuli that were subsampled at different frequencies, either directly in the time domain (input
waveform) or after the level of auditory features (obtained by a vocoder
using linear predictive coding). We then tested auditory recognition of our
stimuli by randomly presenting them to ten subjects, asking them to indicate any snippet that matched the one presented two snippets ago (2-back
task). We show that auditory recognition is more robust to subsampling
on a relatively high level of auditory processing than to subsampling in
the time domain. Although our results do not prove discrete perception in
audition, they (1) show that subsampling is possible without critically disrupting temporal information and (2) suggest that, if subsampling exists, it
should operate on a relatively high level of auditory processing.

C112
ISOLATING THE EFFECTS OF ACOUSTICS AND INTELLIGIBILITY
IN THE PERCEPTION OF DEGRADED SPEECH Kurt Steinmetzger1,
Stuart Rosen1; 1University College London — The spectro-temporal prop-

erties of cortical EEG signals in response to degraded speech have been
examined by several studies in the recent past. Unambiguously attributing the results to particular acoustic manipulations is complicated by the
fact that such manipulations tend also to produce decreased intelligibility.
We attempted to separate out these two effects by presenting normal-hearing listeners with different types of acoustically degraded vocoded speech
that varied with respect to their amount of source periodicity (i.e., voicing)
while recording the EEG signal along with spoken responses. Sorting the
single trials according to the behavioural responses allowed us to examine
a) acoustic effects while controlling for intelligibility and b) effects of intelligibility while controlling for acoustic differences. EEG waveforms were
found to be consistently more negative with more voicing and, to a slightly
lesser degree, in response to speech that is intelligible. An analysis of the
power spectra of the EEG responses during the stimulus interval showed
the same pattern of results in the delta band (1-4 Hz). These power differences were absent during the preceding baseline window but interestingly
we instead found more alpha power (7-12 Hz) for unintelligible speech
there. In summary, our analyses suggest that both the acoustic properties
and intelligibility of speech are reflected by similar neural correlates, but
that both factors contribute independently. Additionally, we found that the
amount of alpha power in the silent baseline interval seems to be a factor
that influences the intelligibility of the speech that follows.

C113
ON SCREAMS AND ROUGHNESS: SPECTROTEMPORAL SPECIFICITY, BEHAVIOURAL SENSITIVITY, AND NEURAL DRIVE Luc
Arnal1,2, Adeen Flinker1, David Poeppel1,3; 1Department of Psychology, New York
University, 2Department of Neuroscience, University of Geneva, Switzerland,
3
NYUAD Institute, New York University Abu Dhabi — Screams are arguably the

most relevant communication signal to promote survival, both in humans
and non-humans. To date, the literature has focused mainly on high-order aspects of alarm signals, e.g. referential calls in monkeys, or prosodic
cues for fear in human speech. Despite their theoretical significance as
innate, primitive and universal communication signals, remarkably few

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

113

Poster Session C
studies provide a detailed characterization of screams. A comprehensive
perspective linking acoustic, behavioural, and neural approaches to investigate arguably the most elementary, non-referential form of communication is missing. Using a neurally-informed characterization of sounds that
is increasingly used in speech research, the modulation power spectrum
(MPS), we first show that screams exploit a specific, restricted portion of
the modulation spectrum between ~30–150 Hz that corresponds to a wellknown perceptual attribute, roughness. In contrast to the received view that
roughness rates are irrelevant for communication, our data suggest that the
roughness regime constitutes a privileged ‘acoustic niche’ for alarm signals
that is segregated from other communication signals such as speech. We
then show that roughness is exploited in both natural and artificial alarm
signals and improves performance in various tasks, suggesting that roughness confers an advantage to react rapidly and efficiently. Moreover, we
assess the neural processing of roughness using fMRI and find that these
sounds are routed in a privileged manner to the amygdala, a structure
critical to assess danger. The results suggest constraints on theories of the
evolution of communication signals in which con-specific vocalizations
evolved to fit specific neural and biomechanical constraints.

C114
NEURAL CORRELATES OF MUSICIANS’ COMPENSATORY TIMING
ADJUSTMENTS FOLLOWING ALTERED AUDITORY FEEDBACK
DURING PERFORMANCE Brian Mathias1, Guido Guberman1, William J.
Gehring2, Caroline Palmer1; 1McGill University, 2University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor — In order to produce auditory sequences such as language and

music quickly and accurately, individuals plan upcoming sequence events
while monitoring the auditory feedback of their productions. According to
future-oriented models of planning, altered feedback that corresponds to
future events may create more interference than feedback corresponding to
past events. The current study investigated electrophysiological correlates
of performers’ planning processes by presenting future- and past-oriented
auditory feedback during musicians’ performances. Pianists memorized
isochronous melodies and then performed the melodies from memory at
a cued tempo in a synchronization-continuation task while the electroencephalogram was recorded. Auditory feedback contained occasional
altered tones that matched either a Future pitch (next intended event) or
a Past pitch (preceding event). The timing of pianists’ key presses slowed
following Future feedback, and greater slowing was associated with larger
N100 amplitudes one tone after the Future feedback. In contrast, no slowing was observed in the Past condition, and N100 and FRN amplitudes that
occurred immediately following the altered feedback pitch were larger in
the Past condition than the Future condition. These findings suggest roles
of both sensory processing (N100) and evaluation (FRN) of altered feedback that accompanies compensatory timing adjustments during music
performance, with the neural processing of Past feedback showing an
earlier time-course than the processing of Future feedback. Anticipatory
planning of future events may modulate influences of auditory feedback on
the production of auditory sequences, consistent with models that preferentially weight the future and suppress the past in accounting for planning
processes during sequence production.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
C115
TITLE: VISUAL SEARCH ASYMMETRY REDUX: SEARCH THROUGH
TIME IS LIKE SEARCH THROUGH SPACE. Elizabeth Blundon1, Lawrence
Ward1; 1University of British Columbia — We observed behavioural and electrophysiological evidence of search asymmetry in auditory and sequential
visual search tasks using oddball stimuli consisting of two different types
of five-item patterns. One type, called the flat pattern, consisted of 5 identical items, while the other type, called the change pattern, consisted of 4
identical items, with the fifth item differing in frequency (auditory), colour,
contrast or shade (sequential visual) from the previous 4. Behavioural
results were consistent with those of typical simultaneous visual search
asymmetry (Treisman & Souther, 1985): because of the salient feature difference in the change pattern that was not present in the flat pattern, participants were faster to identify rare (20%) change patterns among sequences
of common (80%) flat patterns than to identify rare flat patterns among

114

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
common change patterns. Also, P300 ERP’s to change pattern oddballs
were earlier, larger, and sharper than P300 ERP’s to flat pattern oddballs,
which were much later, smaller, and broader. These results are consistent
with those observed by Luck and Hillyard (1990) in a conceptual replication of Treisman and Souther’s (1985) original visual search asymmetry
study. Together, these behavioural and electrophysiological results suggest
that search asymmetry may not be limited to simultaneous visual search
but that such a phenomenon can be observed using auditory stimuli and
sequentially-presented visual stimuli. Thus, “search” through time may
employ processes, possibly based on stimulus salience arising from feature
differences, similar to those used in search through space.

C116
SYNESTHESIA AND SENSORY CONFLICT: AN EVENT RELATED-POTENTIAL STUDY OF COLOR-GRAPHEME ASSOCIATIONS
Danielle N. Lordo1, John Carney1, Summer Issa1, Deepa Patel1, Eliana L.
Sudikoff1, David A. S. Kaufman1; 1Saint Louis University — Synesthesia is a con-

dition that involves the blending of two or more senses. The present study
was designed to investigate the neural correlates of synesthesia, using
event-related potentials (ERPs) to measure brain processes associated with
color-grapheme processing. A color-grapheme synesthete was recruited to
complete a Stroop-like task in which letters were presented in congruent
and incongruent colors. The stability of synesthesia associations was also
tested with a learning task in which specific color-letter pairs were viewed
for an extended period of time. Healthy controls without synesthesia completed the same experimental procedures, in order to determine if extended
viewing of specific color-letter pairs would mimic the effects of synesthesia. The synesthete exhibited Stroop-like alterations in behavioral task data,
with enhanced accuracy and faster reaction times for congruent trials and
significantly greater errors and slower reaction times for incongruent trials.
Healthy controls demonstrated congruency effects from the learning task,
such that congruent trials yielded greater accuracy. ERP results showed
congruency effects in the synesthete that were amplified following the
learning task and demonstrated an association of faster reaction times with
larger P3 amplitudes for congruent trails. Healthy controls showed no ERP
effects of congruency following the learning task. These results suggest
that enhanced processing occurs through repeated exposure of congruent color-letter pairs for synesthetes, while conflict processing occurs for
incongruent color-letter pairs. The identified inability of non-synesthetes
to learn synesthetic associations may highlight the differences in the neural
correlates of color-grapheme processing in synesthesia. Further research is
needed to expand these findings.

C117
SPEAKING IN NOISE AND THE ROLE OF “FEEDBACK” Sophie Meekings1, Samuel Evans1, Nadine Lavan2, Sophie Scott1; 1University College London,
2
Royal Holloway University of London — We talk over background noise on a
daily basis- so how complicated can it be? Previous studies have framed
the problem of speaking in noise as one of impaired auditory feedback.
That is, noise “masks” speech, causing a mismatch between feedback and
auditory targets. Increased activity in the superior temporal gyrus (STG),
found when speaking in noise compared to quiet, has been interpreted as
encoding this mismatch (Christoffels et al, 2007). However, noise is often a
source of information in its own right- and behavioural evidence suggests
we use it. For example, when talking over a competing speaker, subjects
are better at retiming their speech to take advantage of gaps in noise, compared to similar maskers with no semantic content (Cooke & Lu, 2010). This
study used sparse fMRI to record neural responses as participants read sentences aloud in the presence of four different masking conditions, varying
in both informational and energetic content—clear speech, rotated speech,
speech modulated noise, and continuous white noise. There were three
baselines- speaking in quiet, listening to noise, and silent reading. Analysis
revealed increased activity in STG when speaking in noise, compared with
speech in quiet. If this resulted from a feedback mismatch, the strongest
response should have been to speaking in white noise (the most effective
energetic masker). Instead, activation increased with the amount of informational content, with speaking over a competing talker eliciting the greatest response. This pattern remained even when the effect of hearing the
different maskers was factored out.

2015 Annual Meeting

C118
EFFECTS OF LEARNING ON SOMATOSENSORY AND AUDITORY
DECISION-MAKING AND EXPERIENCES: IMPLICATIONS FOR
MEDICALLY UNEXPLAINED SYMPTOMS Akib Ul Huque1,2, Ellen Poliakoff1, Richard J. Brown1; 1The University of Manchester, UK, 2The University of
Dhaka, Bangladesh — The phenomenon of medically unexplained symp-

toms (MUS), where patients experience disabling physical symptoms in
the absence of medical pathology, is a striking example of how perception
often misrepresents sensory input. Recent theory likens MUS to somatic
false alarms (FAs) and suggests that training to reduce somatosensory FAs
more generally might result in decreased symptom reporting. We sought
to test this idea in two studies investigating (i) whether the FA rate in a
somatosensory signal detection task (SSDT) could be altered with operant
conditioning; and (ii) whether this learning would transfer to other sensory
decisions as measured by spontaneous sensation (SPS) and voice detection
tasks (VDT). In Study 1, non-clinical participants (n = 34) were rewarded for
hit responses and punished for misses on the SSDT, with a view to increasing their FA rate. In study 2, participants (n = 39) were rewarded for correct
rejections and punished for false alarms, with a view to decreasing their
FA rate. Control participants underwent pseudo-training procedures. All
participants completed the VDT and SPS before and after the SSDT training
to study perceptual transfer. As predicted, operant conditioning increased
(study 1) and decreased (study 2) FAs on the SSDT; this effect transferred
to FAs on the VDT in study 1 only. Neither study showed transfer on the
SPS. The results suggest that it is possible to train perceptual distortion and
that this may generalize to other perceptual decisions under some circumstances. This has potential implications for the mechanisms and management of MUS.

C119
MODALITY-GENERAL CATEGORIZATION IN PARIETAL CORTEX
Seth M Levine1, Jens Schwarzbach1; 1Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, University of Trento — Perceptual decision making is the cognitive process of

converting stimuli into an abstract format that allows further cognitive or
motor processes to engage appropriately. In categorization tasks, perceptual decisions result in the classification of sensory information into discrete, abstract categories. Various studies in the field of perceptual decision making have demonstrated some level of category-specificity within
parietal regions of both humans and monkey. However, nearly all of these
studies have investigated the matter through the visual domain, leaving the
question of domain-general categorization in parietal cortex open to speculation. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging on healthy humans,
we tasked participants with categorizing the direction of low-level auditory
and tactile frequency-modulated (FM) sweeps in a delayed match-to-category paradigm, which is designed to disentangle overt responses from
stimulus categorization. To detect cortical representations of FM sweep
directions, irrespective of the sensory domain, we used whole-brain multivariate pattern analysis implemented through support vector machine
(SVM) classification. By removing confounds related to higher-level semantics and predictable motor outputs, the SVM was able to decode such categorical representations for both sensory modalities within only the intraparietal sulcus. These findings offer a new view that the parietal lobes play
a domain-general role in abstractly representing task-relevant categories.

C120
MAPPING SHAPE TO SOUND: EARLY SOUND SYMBOLISM FOR
CONSONANTS Melissa Holman1, Ferrinne Spector1; 1Edgewood College,
Madison, WI — Children and adults reliably map sound to shape in a non-arbitrary way. Nonsense words with rounded vowels (e.g., bobo) are consistently mapped to rounded shapes and nonsense words with non-rounded
vowels (e.g., kiki)) to angular shapes (e.g., Spector & Maurer, 2013; Maurer,
Pathman & Mondloch, 2006). Such associations have been accredited to
the roundedness of the vowel sound, with recent evidence elucidating the
influence of the consonant sound (Grulke & Spector, 2014). In order to dissociate the learned versus naturally biased influences on these associations,
in the present study, we investigate the influence of consonant sounds
on sound-shape matching in pre-literate children (30-36 months). During
each trial, participants heard a nonsense word and made a forced choice
between an angular and rounded shape. Stimuli were nonsense words

Poster Session C
with reduplicated syllables that contained consonants which show a strong
shape bias in adults. Importantly, the nonsense words were presented in
standardized video format in order to ensure that each participant received
identical stimuli. Preliminary results confirm previous evidence that consonant sounds have a systematic influence on shape choice. These results
add to a body of research suggesting that sound-shape mapping may result
from the joint influence of learning and natural biases linking language
across sensory systems. Such links may reflect inherent neural organization
that is modifiable with learning and that can manifest as sound symbolic
associations. This non-arbitrary sound shape mapping could help facilitate
early language learning in a world where sound may be mapped to objects
in a meaningful way.

C121
HEARING SHAPES: ERPS REVEAL CHANGES IN PERCEPTUAL
PROCESSING AS A RESULT OF SENSORY SUBSTITUTION TRAINING Christian Graulty1, Orestis Papaioannou1, Phoebe Bauer1, Makaela Stephens2, Johnathan Sheiman1, Michael Pitts1, Enriqueta Canseco-Gonzalez1;
1
Reed College, 2Pomona College — The present study measured event-related

potentials (ERPs) to visual shape stimuli and auditory ‘soundscapes’ in
sighted individuals (N=31) one day before and one day after sensory substitution training. The soundscapes were generated from the visual shapes
using the Meijer image-to-sound conversion algorithm, which was used
to train the experimental group for 2 hours on these shape-soundscape
pairs. Control participants were trained with the exact same stimuli and
performed the same task but crucially, the shapes/soundscapes were randomly paired. Behavioral measures confirmed that both groups were able
to learn the shape-soundscape pairs, but only the experimental group was
able to generalize this learning to novel stimuli (68% accuracy). ERPs elicited by the soundscape stimuli revealed an anterior positivity in the postminus-pre-training difference waves (380-480ms post-stimulus) that was
unique to the experimental group. In a second study with 32 new subjects,
this post-vs-pre-training effect replicated even when the shape-soundscape
pairings were made task-irrelevant. We interpret this anterior positivity as
reflecting early automatic cross-modal transfer (before the 500ms soundscape was complete) brought-on by relatively brief sensory substitution
training with the Meijer algorithm.

C122
EXPERIENCING THE PAIN OF OTHERS: THE LINK BETWEEN
SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX HYPERACTIVITY AND CONSCIOUS
MIRROR-PAIN EXPERIENCES Thomas Grice-Jackson1, Hugo Critchley2, Jamie Ward1; 1University of Sussex, 2Brighton and Sussex Medical School
(BSMS) — For most individuals the observation of others in pain, or vicar-

ious pain, does not elicit a conscious experience of pain in the observer;
however, some individuals regularly experience vivid conscious vicarious
pain (known here as mirror-pain responders), and a significant portion of
the general population report these experiences occasionally. Through the
development of an online screening questionnaire the current study presents a method for identifying and profiling the experiences of mirror-pain
responders. These individuals and a group of controls were recruited for a
follow-up EEG experiment which assessed suppression of somatosensory
cortex alpha oscillations, Mu-suppression (known to reflect somatosensory
cortex activity), during the observation of painful and neutral images. The
findings display significant Mu-suppression during the observation of pain
images for both controls and pain responders. Additionally, pain responders displayed greater Mu-suppression during pain observations relative to
controls indicating that their experiences may be manifested in hyperactivity of the somatosensory cortex. Correlations between Mu-suppression and
measures from the online questionnaire indicate a link between increased
somatosensory activity and an increased tendency to localise conscious
vicarious pain experiences to a particular point on the individual’s own
body (as opposed to generalised bodily pain). Mirror-pain responders
report less tendency to engage in perspective taking on a questionnaire
measure of empathy and, in this group, less perspective taking is linked to
more increased somatosensory activity for painful images. Although experiencing the pain of others is, at one level, ‘empathic’ it may paradoxically
result in less tendency to put oneself in others shoes.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

115

Poster Session C

C123
NEURAL BASIS OF ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN VISUAL STIMULI
AND AUDITORY PITCH Kelly McCormick1, Randall Stilla1, Simon Lacey1,
Sara List1, Lynne Nygaard1, K Sathian1; 1Emory University — Extensive behav-

ioral research has demonstrated systematic cross-sensory mappings for a
number of perceptual domains (e.g. pitch-object size, pitch-vertical spatial
position, waveform-object shape). Although such mappings are fundamental to diverse cognitive processes such as iconic symbol use, language,
multisensory integration, and object recognition, the underlying neural
mechanisms are not well understood. We examine the contributions of
three putative systems hypothesized to mediate these mappings: 1) multisensory integrative systems, which support the combination and integration of information from multiple sensory channels; 2) the magnitude
system which enables comparison and alignment of different sensory stimuli in a supramodal, quantitative format, 3) the semantic system, encompassing language and conceptual systems. In a functional neuroimaging
study, we examined the correspondence between acoustic pitch and visual
stimuli. Participants were presented simple perceptual stimuli (e.g. a highpitched tone and a small circle), in unisensory and multisensory (audio +
visual) conditions. A congruency effect for the multisensory conditions was
observed bilaterally in the superior temporal sulcus (STS), left inferior frontal gyrus, and right anterior insula. Using three functional localizers, we
identified systems recruited for multisensory integration, magnitude, and
semantic processing, then assessed the extent to which multimodal congruency engages these systems. Within congruency-sensitive regions, right
anterior STS showed a semantic effect, left posterior STS showed effects for
magnitude, semantic, and multisensory localizers, and right anterior insula
showed multisensory and magnitude effects. Our findings suggest that the
neural basis of these cross-sensory mappings is functionally and spatially
distributed, with a common locus in the left posterior STS.

THINKING: Decision making
C124
LIBERAL PARTISANSHIP AFFECTS INFORMATION GATHERING
IN POLITICAL CHOICE AS ASSESSED BY EYE MOVEMENTS Sekoul
Krastev1, Dietlind Stolle1, Elisabeth Gidengil1, Lesley K Fellows1; 1McGill University — The mechanisms that support voting are a central topic in political

psychology and have recently begun to be studied using the methods of
cognitive neuroscience. The attentional Drift Diffusion Model (aDDM) has
been used to study the neural correlates of information processing during
economic value-based choices. We asked whether this same methodology
could be applied to measure evidence gathering in voting and explored the
effect of partisanship on this process. We adapted procedures used in past
aDDM experiments to study hypothetical voting choices. Twelve Canadian
Liberal partisans and twelve non-partisans made binary choices between
photographs of unknown political candidates in the presence and absence
of party information. Choice behavior and eye movements were tracked
throughout the experiment. As predicted by the aDDM, final fixations were
significantly shorter than middle fixations and were predominantly toward
the chosen item across all groups and conditions. Both groups made fewer
fixations in the presence of party information. Partisans made significantly
faster decisions with fewer fixations even in the absence of party information. This is preliminary evidence that the aDDM can be used to describe
information gathering in political choice. Partisanship has unique prominence in political decision making. These findings suggest that either specific party affiliation or partisanship in general influences decision making
behavior, even in the absence of party information. This work offers a new
approach to investigating the neural basis of political decision making.

C125
TASK IRRELEVANT FEATURE-VALUE ASSOCIATIONS ELICIT
NEURAL REWARD PREDICTION ERROR SIGNALS Timothy Vickery1, Kyle Friedman1, Rachel Bristol2; 1University of Delaware, 2University of
California, San Diego — Many decisions depend on learned associations
between option features and value. Reinforcement learning (RL) models
of such decisions often implicitly assume that only relevant, attended
feature-value associations are tracked, updated via reward prediction

116

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
errors (RPEs), and employed in decisions. How well are humans able to
selectively attend to a given visual feature dimension to learn appropriate feature-value associations, while ignoring irrelevant feature-value
associations? Using model-based fMRI, we examined neural responses
during a simple reward-learning task (4-armed bandit), in which participants (N=26) selected one of four options represented by colored squares
on each trial. After selecting, participants either received a reward or no
reward. Reward was independently and probabilistically associated with
each of the four colors, and the probability of reward varied independently
for each color over time. Thus, participants were encouraged to actively
learn the values of each color throughout the experiment. Importantly,
locations of the colored items were randomly determined on every trial
and were completely unrelated to value. Consistent with prior work, RPE
based on color was correlated with activity in several regions of the brain,
including ventral striatum. However, we additionally estimated irrelevant
location-value associations and related prediction errors. Neural activity
in several regions, including ventral striatum, was additionally correlated
with location RPE, implying latent value signals related to the irrelevant
feature. Humans may track multiple feature-value associations in parallel,
even when they are not presumed to be relevant to action. Such latent signals may serve to guide exploratory actions, or actions taken under high
uncertainty.

C126
NEUROFUNCTIONAL EVIDENCE FOR THE DUAL PROCESS
THEORY ON VALUE-BASED DECISIONS Chun-Wei Hsu1, Joshua Goh2;
1

Plymouth University, UK, 2National Taiwan University — Dual process theory

proposes two cognitive systems underlying human decision-making. Specifically, there is a set of explicit and rational processes involving working memory neural circuitry and a set of implicit and automatic processes
generally involving more limbic systems. However, the neural correlates
of how these two systems coincide when evaluating choices and processing related feedback during decision-making remain unknown. To investigate the extent to which neural activity engaged during value-based
decision-making overlaps with controlled and automatic processing,
respectively, twenty participants completed three tasks (lottery choice (LC),
arithmetic and emotion decision-making) in the same format but with different goals in this functional magnetic resonance imaging study. We found
that, during the choice period, the emotion task strongly shared common
areas with the LC task in the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and bilateral
parietal areas. By contrast, the arithmetic task overlapped with the LC task
more in bilateral striatal areas. During feedback, the emotion task overlapped with the LC task in left IFG, middle frontal and middle temporal
areas, and bilateral angular gyri. By contrast, arithmetic-LC task overlap
was more extensive additionally involving the right hemisphere homologues of these areas. These novel findings delineate the neural loci of cooperative or competitive input from explicit arithmetic and implicit emotion
subsystems during value-based choice evaluation and updating during
feedback. This is the first study to investigate neural evidence for the dual
process theory in which we are able to directly compare how these two
systems are involved in rational or irrational value-based decision-making.

C127
VENTRO-MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND STABILITY IN ART
PREFERENCE Steven Weisberg1, Melissa Beswick1, Anjan Chatterjee1; 1University of Pennsylvania — The ventro-medial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) is

a critical part of the human reward circuitry and has been implicated in
encoding value and judging preferences. Fellows and Farah (2007) reported
instability in VMPFC lesion patients’, compared to age- and IQ-matched
controls’ and non-VMPFC lesion patients’, preferences for food, color, and
faces of famous people, despite stable perceptual judgments. We investigated preference stability in VMPFC lesion patients using famous paintings, in part, because the VMPFC is activated when participants view
paintings they judge as beautiful (Kawabata & Zeki, 2004). We selected 12
paintings from a set of 24, normed in a previous study (Chatterjee, Widick,
Sternschein, Smith, & Bromberger, 2010). Thirteen VMPFC patients and
24 age-matched controls made three judgments about each pair of paintings: a) preference, b) representational accuracy, and c) color warmth. We
measured stability by determining the number of intransitivities (i.e., A>B,
and B>C, but C<A) participants exhibited in their judgments. We predicted greater instability for patients in their preference judgments, but not

2015 Annual Meeting
accuracy and color. Results indicated, if anything, the opposite: patients
exhibited greater rigidity than controls, p = .07. There were no differences
between the groups for accuracy or color. Exploratory analyses revealed a
relationship between stability for preference judgments with representational accuracy judgments for patients, r = .37, but not for controls, r = -.15.
Our data suggest that VMPFC damage might make people more rigid than
normal in their preferences for complex non-appetitive objects like paintings.

C128
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN DECISION MAKING: EXPLORING NEURAL CORRELATES OF FEEDBACK PROCESSING DURING
IOWA GAMBLING TASK. Elisa Di Rosa1, Sami Schiff1, Daniela Mapelli1;
1
University of Padua — The presence of age-related differences in learning
and decision making has recently been reported during Iowa Gambling
Task (IGT; Bechara et al., 1994), where performance increases from childhood to adulthood and declines in older adults (Beitz et al., 2014). Aim of
the present study is to explore neural correlates of these age-related differences. We recorded event related potentials (ERPs) during IGT in a
group of healthy young adults (N=18; age 25.5 years) and in a group of
healthy older adults (N=15; age 60.7 years) to explore P2, feedback related
negativity (FRN) and P3. Results show that while the valence sensitivity
of both P2 and FRN is preserved in the two groups, with greater P2 and
FRN amplitude respectively after positive and negative feedback, both
components are significantly attenuated in older adults (p<.05). More
interestingly, opposite trends were found in the valence-modulation of
P3: adults present a significantly higher P3 after negative feedback, while
older adults show greater P3 after the positive ones. Additionally, within
group analysis reveals that the difference in P3 amplitude after positive
and negative feedback was higher in young adults, respect to older adults
(p<.0001). Our results are in line with literature concerning diminished P2
and FRN amplitude in older adults as compared to younger adults (West et
al., 2014); moreover, our data about the inverted trend in P3 valence modulation could be interpreted as the presence of an “age-related positivity
effect” and suggest the presence of age-related differences in the sensitivity
to rewarding and aversive stimuli.

C129
NOVEL TYPE OF DOPAMINE NEURONS ENCODING STABLE
OBJECT VALUE MEMORY. Hyoung Kim1, Ali Ghazizadeh2, Okihide Hikosaka3; 1Laboratory of Sensorimotor Research, National Eye Institute – National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, 2Laboratory of Sensorimotor Research,
National Eye Institute – National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, 3Laboratory of Sensorimotor Research, National Eye Institute – National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA — Midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons are thought

to be critical for reward-value based learning by modulating synaptic transmission in the striatum. Using macaque monkeys, we recently showed that
visual object-value learning occurred slowly and the value memory was
retained stably in neurons in caudate tail (CDt), unlike neurons in caudate
head (CDh) (Kim & Hikosaka, Neuron 2013). We then found that CDt
receives DA inputs exclusively from caudal-dorsal-lateral region of substantia nigra pars compacta (cdlSNc), which is segregated from rostral-ventral-medial SNc (rvmSNc) projecting to CDh (Kim et al., Front Neuroanat
2014). These data suggest that cdlSNc-DA neurons guide learning of stable
object values in CDt. To test this hypothesis, we examined DA neuronal
activity in two stages: 1) object-value learning, followed by 2) passive
viewing with no reward feedback. Both rvmSNc neurons and cdlSNc neurons learned to discriminate high- and low-valued objects. However, they
behaved completely differently in the passive viewing task: rvmSNc neurons stopped responding to the objects, whereas cdlSNc neurons continued
to respond to the objects differentially: excited by high-valued objects and
inhibited by low-valued objects. rvmSNc and cdlSNc neurons showed similar spike shapes and firing patterns, which are characteristic of DA neurons.
We then histologically reconstructed recording sites of cdlSNc neurons and
found them within a cluster of tyrosin hydroxylase-positive neurons, suggesting that they are dopaminergic. Our data suggest that the two groups
of DA neurons contribute to the different time courses of object value learning in CDt and CDh by conveying different reward-related signals.

Poster Session C

C130
DIVERGENT NEURAL ACTIVITY BETWEEN GOVERNMENT AND
BUSINESS LEADERS IN RESPONSE TO MONETARY GAINS AND
LOSSES: A MONETARY INCENTIVE DELAY (MID) PILOT STUDY
Bruce L. Jones1, Neena K. Rao1, Francesca Mapua Filbey1, John Hart1,2, L. Douglas Kiel1; 1The University of Texas at Dallas, 2The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center — Scholars have long been interested in the differing reward
preferences between government and business leaders. The present study
explored the differential neural underpinnings using fMRI of incentive
anticipation and outcome during a monetary incentive delay (MID) task
in executive-level leaders from government and business organizations.
Seven male non-elected government leaders (Assistant City Managers to
Federal GS-15s) (M age = 58.43 years, SD = 11.01) and seven male business leaders (Vice President to CEO level) (M age = 50.43 years, SD = 6.78)
were presented with a visual cue indicating whether they could potentially
gain or avoid losing money upon a button press. Overall, the main effect of
anticipation for both gain and loss trials across all amounts elicited greater
neural activity for business leaders than government leaders in the left
middle temporal gyrus, left parahippocampal gyrus, and bilateral middle
frontal gyrus. Overall, the main effect of feedback for both gain and loss
trials across all amounts elicited greater neural activity for business leaders than government leaders in the right thalamus, left parahippocampal,
and left superior frontal gyrus. Both anticipation and feedback effects were
differentially characterized by valence in which business leaders elicited
greater neural activity for gains than losses while government leaders elicited greater neural activity for losses than gains. These data suggest that
the divergent reward preferences of government and business leaders at
anticipation and feedback are identifiable at the neural level, and that government leaders are more attendant to losses while business leaders appear
more focused on gains.

C131
SEPARABLE, YET COMMUNICATING, NEURAL SYSTEMS UNDERLYING UPDATING UNDER AMBIGUITY Kenji Kobayashi1, Ming Hsu1;
1

University of California, Berkeley — The question of how people update their
beliefs under ambiguity, i.e. when probabilities of potential outcomes are
unknown or partially known, based on environmental signals has important implications for our understanding of neural mechanism of decision-making. Updating of beliefs may lead to, but not necessarily equal to,
implications for outcome predictions and values of choices. Furthermore,
since uninformative, yet unpredictable, sensory signals are abundant in
the environment, belief updating is not necessarily driven by the degree to
which the signals violate prior expectancy (surprise), but such separation
has not been clear in the field of decision neuroscience. Here we adopted
a modified paradigm of Ellsberg’s three-color gamble to isolate and dissociate neural systems involved in updating of beliefs, calculating implications for values, and detection of mere surprise of the signals, all quantified
under a rational Bayesian model. Behaviorally, we show that, even under
systematic aversion to ambiguous settings, subjective values of gambles
can be robustly approximated by the rational model. Next, using model-based fMRI, we showed that frontoparietal regions represented updating
of beliefs, while medial prefrontal and cingulate cortex represented value
implication, and anterior insula represented mere surprise. Lastly, using
dynamic causal modeling (DCM), we found evidences for task-dependent
effective connectivity between belief-updating regions and value-implication regions. Taken together, these results suggest that separable sets of
cortical regions encode different aspects of updating under ambiguity, and
constitute a large network to enable sophisticated adjustment of behavior.

C132
UNDERSTANDING CONTROL AND PROCESS-LEVEL ACTIVATION
DURING MULTI-ATTRIBUTE DECISION MAKING Jaymes Durriseau1,
Jarrod Moss1, Jonathan Cagan2, Pinzhi Chen2; 1Mississippi State University,
2
Carnegie Mellon University — Decision making has been hypothesized to be

made up of process-level and control-level operations. The process level
integrates decision-relevant information, whereas, the control-level evaluates this information and allows a decision to be made. Previous studies
have found that different brain regions are involved in the control-level

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

117

Poster Session C
and process-level operations. This study investigated the possible differences in process-level and control-level activity when making multi-attribute preference decisions between two vehicles with different visual and
performance characteristics. The conflict hypothesis predicted that decisions with higher amounts of conflict would elicit higher control-level activation. The multi-representational hypothesis predicted that control level
activity would differ for inter-representational conflict (conflict between
visual and functional information) and intra-representational conflict (conflict within functional information). To test these hypotheses, participants
made two-alternative preference decisions based on: (a) vehicle visual form
information, (b) vehicle function information, or (c) a combination of both
form and function. Sometimes one alternative was clearly superior (clear
winner); sometimes there was not a clearly superior alternative (non-clear
winner). In support of the conflict hypothesis, decisions with conflict (nonclear winner) showed significantly more control-level activation in areas
related to decision conflict monitoring when compared to decisions without conflict (clear winners). These areas included the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and the left anterior insula. In support
of the multi-representational hypothesis, decisions based on visual information showed more neural activity in the fusiform gyrus and the right
middle occipital gyrus, which are areas associated with visuo-spatial processing, when compared to decisions based on functional information.

118

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session D
ATTENTION: Nonspatial
D1
THE EFFECTS OF DISTRACTION ON THE BRAIN PROCESSES
UNDERLYING SIGNAL DETECTION Elise Demeter1, Daniela De Albuquerque1, Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University — The dSAT (distractor Sus-

tained Attention Task) is a translational paradigm used to investigate the
neural mechanisms underlying signal detection and attentional control
(e.g., Demeter et al., 2011; 2013; St. Peters et al., 2011). In the no-distraction
condition (SAT), participants monitor for the occurrence of a brief, variable-duration signal (17, 33 or 50 ms), while the dSAT condition increases
the attentional control demands though the introduction of a global, flashing distractor. Here, we recorded electrical brain activity (EEG) while participants performed the SAT and dSAT to examine how distraction and
signal duration modulated the neural cascade of processes related to signal
detection. Behaviorally, distraction and signal duration interacted, with the
largest detection impairments from distraction occurring at the shortest
duration. Event related potentials to detected signals revealed effects on
a cascade of components. Distraction abolished an anterior N2 component
and reduced and delayed an occipital N2 for all durations (latency 150200 ms). Anteriorly, the P3a increased in amplitude as duration increased,
but was reduced and delayed with distraction (200-300 ms). Posteriorly,
the subsequent P3b (350-700 ms) also increased in amplitude with duration. While distraction did not affect P3b amplitude for detected signals
for the shortest duration, it was significantly larger during distraction for
longer durations. These data suggest increasing signal salience by increasing duration enhances brain activity related to signal detection and processing. Distraction disrupts early detection-related components, while the
enhancement of the longer-latency P3b at longer durations suggests the
engagement of compensatory processes to maintain performance under
attentionally challenging conditions.

D2
CONFIGURAL AND FEATURAL FACE PROCESSING ARE DIFFERENTLY MODULATED BY ATTENTIONAL RESOURCES AT EARLY
STAGES: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY WITH RAPID
SERIAL VISUAL PRESENTATION Hailing Wang1, Pei Sun1, Cheng Teng IP1,
Xin Zhao1, Shimin Fu1; 1Tsinghua University — It is widely reported that face

recognition relies on two dissociable mechanisms, the featural and the configural processing. However, it is unclear whether these two processing
types involve different neural mechanisms and are differently modulated
by attentional resources. Using the attentional blink (AB) paradigm, we
aimed to investigate the effect of attentional resources (deficient vs. sufficient) on configural and featural face processing by recording event-related
potentials (ERPs). The amount of attentional resources was manipulated
as deficient or sufficient by presenting the second target (T2) in or out of
the AB period, respectively. We found that in addition to a traditional
P300 attention effect, the amplitude of N170/VPP was also sensitive to
attentional resources, suggesting that attention affects face processing at
an earlier perceptual processing stage. More importantly, configural face
processing elicited a larger P1 compared to featural face processing, but
only when the attentional resources were sufficient. In contrast, the anterior
N1 was larger for configural relative to featural face processing only when
the attentional resources were deficient. These results suggest that early
stages of configural and featural face processing are differently modulated
by attentional resources. Therefore, attentional resources have a different
influence on configural and featural face processing, and this modulation
begins at early perceptual stages with different underlying mechanisms.

D3
TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF ALPHA PHASE AS A MECHANISM OF
TEMPORAL PREDICTION Jason Samaha1, Phoebe Bauer2, Sawyer Cimaroli1, Bradley R. Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin - Madison, 2Reed College — The

phase of prestimulus oscillations in the alpha band (9-13 Hz) of the EEG has

been show to predict subsequent visual perception, effective connectivity,
BOLD response magnitude in visual cortex, and variability in visual shortterm memory performance, leading many to suggest that alpha oscillations
implement phasic windows of cortical inhibition and excitation. Given
the importance of alpha phase for subsequent processing, we investigated
whether it is under attentional control. Specifically, we asked is knowledge
about when a stimulus will appear could improve visual processing by
biasing alpha at the predicted moment towards an optimal phase. We collected EEG recordings while participants completed an orientation discrimination task in which some targets appeared at a predictively cued latency,
while others appeared at an unpredictable latency. Results reveal an
improvement in discrimination accuracy and subjective visibility following
predictive, relative to unpredictive cues. This was accompanied by modulation of the phase of posterior alpha just prior to target onset. Phase also
differed between correct and incorrect trials, revealing an optimal phase
for discrimination in the task. Importantly, the phase during attended time
points was significantly biased towards this optimal phase. These data suggest that alpha-band oscillations may not only reflect purely spontaneous
fluctuations in cortical excitability, but may also serve as a mechanism for
the implementation of volitional control over visual perception.

D4
MECHANISMS OF RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN RHYTHMIC CONTEXTS: REVISITING THE ROLE OF INCIDENTAL OSCILLATORY
ENTRAINMENT Assaf Breska1, Leon Y. Deouell1; 1The Hebrew University, Israel
— Rhythmic input dynamics are common in our environment (e.g. speech,

biological motion), and can be used to facilitate performance through forming temporal predictions. It was suggested that such facilitation is achieved
through entrainment of ongoing brain oscillations to the external rhythmicity. In two EEG studies, we investigated the cognitive and neural mechanisms of synchronization to visual rhythms. The first study examined
whether rhythm effects can be explained by repeated interval timing rather
than by rhythm-specific mechanisms. Participants detected targets appearing either rhythmically, or arrhythmically in pairs with a predictable intrapair interval that could be intentionally memorized. Phase-locking of slow
neural activity did not differ between conditions, suggesting that it is not
a unique signature of rhythm-induced entrainment but could reflect intentional formation of temporal predictions based on memorized intervals.
However, rhythm-based predictions still resulted in larger behavioral costs
of temporally unexpected targets and earlier resolution of the contingent
negative variation (CNV), indicating a unique effect for a rhythmic mode
of processing. The second study examined whether peaks of responsiveness and slow brain activity could be shifted away from time-points that
coincide with rhythms. Participants viewed rhythmic stimuli and detected
targets which appeared with high probability at off-beat times. We found
that when participants were provided with accurate temporal representation of the new expected time-point, both peaks of performance and the
CNV were shifted in time away from the rhythm and towards the expected
off-beat times. We suggest that these results are not commensurate with a
straightforward neural entrainment account.

D5
PRECONSCIOUS, CONSCIOUS, AND POST-PERCEPTUAL PROCESSING OF VISUAL WORD FORMS IN AN INATTENTIONAL
BLINDNESS PARADIGM Kathryn Schelonka1, Enriqueta Canseco-Gonzalez1, Michael Pitts1; 1Reed College — A sustained inattentional blindness par-

adigm was adapted to record ERPs elicited by word forms that were or
were not consciously perceived. In the first phase, participants performed a
difficult tracking task overlaid on a background of changing line segments.
In 45% of trials, the line segments changed from one scrambled configuration to another, while on 55% of trials, the line segments changed to form
words and nonwords (random consonant strings) at fixation. At the end
of the first phase participants’ awareness of the word forms was assessed
and participants who failed to notice the word forms were considered inattentionally blind (~30% of participants). In the second phase, participants

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

119

Poster Session D
repeated the same tracking task after being cued to the existence of the
words and nonwords. In the third phase, participants were instructed to
ignore the tracking task and attend to the word forms in order to detect
target stimuli (animal words). In all phases of the experiment, including
inattentional blindness, ERPs recorded over the posterior scalp from ~110170ms differed in amplitude between word forms and scrambled lines,
possibly reflecting preconscious perceptual processing. A subsequent ERP
component recorded over bilateral occipital-parietal areas (~250-370ms),
along with a frontally-biased N400 effect, appeared only when subjects
were aware of the word forms, but regardless of task-relevancy. Finally,
a frontal selection positivity (~190-360ms) and a broadly distributed P3
component (~450-650ms) were evident only when the word forms were
task-relevant. Overall, these results help distinguish brain activity associated with conscious perception from pre- and post-perceptual processing.

D6
ISOLATING NEURAL CORRELATES OF CONSCIOUS PERCEPTION FROM NEURAL CORRELATES OF REPORTING ONE’S PERCEPTION: A 2X2 MANIPULATION OF VISUAL AWARENESS AND
TASK-RELEVANCE Michael Pitts1, Stephen Metzler1, Steve Hillyard2; 1Reed
College, 2University of California San Diego — To isolate neural correlates of
conscious perception (NCCs), a standard approach has been to contrast
neural activity elicited by identical stimuli of which subjects are aware
versus unaware. Because conscious experience is private, determining
whether a stimulus was consciously perceived requires subjective report:
e.g., button-presses indicating detection, verbal reports, etc. This reporting
requirement introduces a methodological confound when attempting to
isolate NCCs: The neural processes responsible for accessing and reporting
one’s percept are difficult to distinguish from those underlying the conscious percept itself. Here, we attempt to circumvent this issue via a backward masking experiment in which task-relevance and visual awareness
were manipulated in a 2x2 crossed design. Based on an initial behavioral
experiment that determined appropriate masking SOAs, shape and color
stimuli were rendered visible or invisible while subjects performed a shape
or color discrimination task. Stimuli that were consciously perceived yet
not immediately accessed for report (visible, task-irrelevant condition)
elicited a mid-latency posterior ERP negativity (~200-240ms), while stimuli accessed for report (visible, task-relevant condition) elicited additional
components including a robust P3b (~380-480ms) subsequent to the mid-latency negativity. These results suggest that some of the NCCs identified in
previous studies may be more closely linked with accessing and maintaining perceptual information for reporting purposes than with encoding the
conscious percept itself. An open question is whether the remaining NCC
candidate (ERP negativity at 200-240ms) reflects neural activity uniquely
dedicated to conscious visual processing, or alternatively, an interaction
between attentional mechanisms and perceptual representations in the
ventral visual stream.

D7
THE P300 AMPLITUDE PREDICTS TEMPORAL DILATION IN AN
ODDBALL TASK Benjamin Ernst1, Simon M. Reichard1, Regina F. Riepl1, Sarah
F. Zimmermann1, Marco Steinhauser1; 1Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
— Our experience of time is often subject to distortions. For instance, time

appears to slow down when unexpected events occur. Previous research
has shown that the duration of infrequent, task-relevant stimuli - so-called
oddballs - is commonly overestimated, an effect referred to as temporal
expansion. Importantly, oddballs are also known to cause a pronounced
event-related potential (ERP) component, the P300. Both, temporal expansion and the P300, have been associated with attentional processes and
increased transmission of information to working memory. Therefore,
we hypothesized that the P300 amplitude can be used to predict whether
the duration of an oddball will be overestimated or not. To this end, we
recorded ERPs during an oddball task with pseudo-words of varying duration. Infrequent red target oddballs were embedded within a series of frequent white distractor stimuli. Participants were asked to memorize the
target oddballs and to estimate whether their duration had been longer or
shorter than the duration of the preceding distractor. In addition, participants were also asked to estimate the duration of distractors on infrequent
catch trials. As expected, the duration of target oddballs, but not of distractors, was overestimated and overestimations were associated with larger

120

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
P300 amplitudes than correct estimates. Because the P300 peaked before
stimulus offset, this effect was independent from actual oddball duration.
Moreover, P300 amplitudes as well as time estimation performance predicted oddball recognition performance in the subsequent recognition task.
Together, our results suggest that the processes underlying the generation
of the P300 contribute to the temporal expansion effect.

D8
FUNCTION IN DYSFUNCTION: DISSOCIATION AS A COGNITIVE
STRATEGY IN DIVIDED ATTENTION CONDITIONS Jenn Lewis1,2, Katia
Krane1,2, Mary-Ann Dobrota1,2, Don Tucker1,2; 1University of Oregon, 2Electrical
Geodesics, Inc. — Defined by a lack of integration between thoughts, feel-

ings, identity, and or experiences, dissociation is a mechanism, often recognized as a learned or habituated dysfunctional response to environmental
experiences, particularly those of stress and threat. However, a small body
of behavioral research has suggested that dissociative tendencies may hold
a cognitive advantage in specific situations, such as divided attention conditions. Despite having a potential effect on multiple domains of cognition,
little is known about the neural mechanisms behind dissociation, and less
is clear on how dissociation may affect overall executive functioning. The
current experiment explores dissociation’s effect on neural responses to
highly charged stimuli and their relation to behavioral measures of executive processes. In particular, the study seeks to explore in what situations
dissociation may hold an advantage for an individual and act adaptively.
Using dense array EEG to record neural responses, researchers examined
event-related potentials (ERPs) in participants ranking high or low on
dissociation during a divided attention emotional Stroop task. Distinct
between group differences were identified in ERPs related to attention and
meaning processing, including medial frontal negativity (MFN) and the
P300, where high dissociators presented with particularly attenuated ERPs
compared to low dissociators. Despite presenting with seemingly blunted
neural responses, high dissociators performed at a higher capacity in several behavioral domains compared to low dissociators. These results indicate that high dissociators are employing an alternative cognitive strategy,
which is not only effective in divided attention conditions and responses to
charged stimuli, but potentially advantageous.

ATTENTION: Other
D9
ATTENTIONAL CONTROL OF UNCONSCIOUS SEMANTIC PROCESSING DEPENDS ON ESTABLISHMENT OF DYNAMIC FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS Markus Kiefer1, Martin Ulrich1, Sarah C.
Adams1; 1University of Ulm, Germany — In classical theories of automaticity and
attention, unconscious automatic processes are thought to be independent
of higher-level attentional influences. However, in our attentional sensitization model we propose that unconscious automatic processing depends
on attentional enhancement of task-congruent processing pathways. We
assume that attentional sensitization is achieved by dynamically establishing functional brain networks depending on the active task set. Here,
we investigated the functional neuroanatomical architecture of attentional
sensitization of unconscious semantic processing with a modified masked
semantic paradigm in a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. In
our induction task paradigm, participants attended before masked prime
presentation in a classification task either to semantic or perceptual stimulus features, which should activate a semantic and perceptual task set,
respectively (induction task). Thereafter, a subliminal semantic priming
task was presented. Brain activity was modulated by semantic priming
only after the semantic but not after the perceptual induction task in left
ventral occipito-temporal cortex (VOT), a brain area known to be involved
in semantic processing. Functional connectivity analyses of left VOT as
seed region revealed different functional networks depending on the active
task set: During a semantic task set, VOT was more strongly coupled with a
frontal region involved in semantic retrieval, whereas during a perceptual
task set a stronger coupling of VOT with visual perceptual brain regions in
occipital cortex was found. Most importantly, functional connectivity patterns predicted the magnitude of subliminal priming. Hence, attentional
control modulates unconscious processing in semantic pathways by a
dynamic integration of brain areas into different functional networks.

2015 Annual Meeting

D11
NEURAL ACTIVATION ABNORMALITIES UNDERLYING FACIAL
EMOTION PERCEPTION IN SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS AND
FIRST-DEGREE RELATIVES Michael J. Spilka1, Aiden E. Arnold1, Vina M.
Goghari1; 1University of Calgary — A core feature of schizophrenia is impairment in social cognition, including deficits in perceiving emotional information from faces. Recent evidence of similar impairments in healthy relatives
of schizophrenia patients suggests that impaired facial emotion perception
may be a marker of genetic vulnerability for the disorder. Abnormalities in
brain functioning associated with facial emotion perception are reported
in schizophrenia; however, findings are inconsistent regarding the extent
to which abnormalities include visual areas and/or regions involved in
emotion processing. One explanation is that traditional facial emotion tasks
recruit a variety of additional cognitive mechanisms (e.g., context processing) that influence the neural activation patterns reported. Moreover, few
studies have included unaffected relatives, reducing the ability to answer
questions concerning the genetic basis of this deficit. The current study
aims to 1) clarify the neural basis of impaired facial emotion perception
in schizophrenia through a simple passive viewing task of facial emotion
perception, and 2) investigate the genetic risk for neural activation abnormalities related to facial emotion by using a family study design. Twenty-eight schizophrenia patients, 27 unaffected relatives, and 27 healthy
controls underwent a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scan
while viewing images of different facial emotions. Region-of-interest and
whole-brain analyses revealed hypoactivation in face processing areas for
both schizophrenia patients and unaffected relatives compared to controls,
and hyperactivation in relatives for frontal regions implicated in emotion
processing. Results suggest that activation abnormalities during facial emotion perception represent genetic vulnerability markers for schizophrenia,
and may be accompanied by compensatory mechanisms in relatives.

D12
ATTENUATED VISUAL N1 FOLLOWING ERRORS Liesbet Van der
Borght1, Hanne Schevernels1, Boris Burle2, Wim Notebaert1; 1Ghent University, 2Aix-Marseille Université — Errors are typically followed by a series of

behavioural changes. While slowing down following an error is a robust
phenomenon, adaptations in accuracy proved more elusive. Recently
Houtman and Notebaert (2013) demonstrated, using a rapid serial visual
presentation task, that participants showed worse target detection following an error in an unrelated flankertask. These findings support the idea
that the occurrence or processing of unexpected error-like events interfere
with subsequent information processing (Notebaert et al., 2009: Jentzsch
& Dudschig, 2009). Following these results, we investigated the effect of
errors on early visual ERP components. For this purpose we combined a
flanker and a visual oddball task. Additionally we manipulated the intertrial interval between both tasks to investigate the duration of these negative after-effects. In an effort to discern these early ERP components more
clearly we applied Laplacian transformation on the monopolar averages.
Interestingly the results show no influence of previous accuracy on both
the P1, measured at PO7 and PO8, and N1, measured at Oz. However, the
amplitude of a slightly later N1, at PO7 and PO8, was significantly smaller
following an error than following a correct response, irrespective of the
intertrial-interval. Interestingly the visual N1 has been related to endogenous attention (Hopfinger & West, 2006). These results are in line with the
finding of an attentional dip following errors, providing evidence for the
idea that low-level attentional processing following an error is impaired.

D13
DYSREGULATED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF ATTENTION
AND VALUATION NETWORKS: IMPLICATIONS FOR DECISION
MAKING IN AUTISM Merage Ghane1, John A. Richey1, Ralph-Axel Müller2;
1

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 2San Diego State University —

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting multiple levels of socio-communicative functioning. Slowed switching
of attention also characterizes individuals with ASD. Lower-level attention
processes, like orienting towards salient stimuli, play a role in higher-order functions. In a social environment, efficient attention is crucial for value-based decision-making. Visual-attention brain-regions were found to
modulate signals in areas involved in valuation and decision-making. As

Poster Session D
such, we predict that social-functioning may be driven by altered functional--connectivity between visual-attention and valuation networks in ASD.
Individuals with ASD were predicted to show decreased functional-connectivity between attention and valuation network regions. Our sample
included 16 children with ASD (M=12.86 years) and 13 control (M=12.67
years) participants. We used seed-based resting-state functional-connectivity to evaluate the relationship within-and-between the attention and valuation networks. Imaging analyses were performed using AFNI software
(Cox, 1996). Data were slice-time and motion corrected, scrubbed for artifacts, and co-registered to a standardized MNI-152 T1-weighted l image.
Regions-of-interest (ROIs) were based on peak-activation coordinates
from the results of a study by Litt and colleagues (2011). Averaged ROI
time-series were correlated with each other to assess network connectivity.
Thirty-eight connections within and between attention and valuation-networks were different in ASD (all ps≤.05 corrected). Of these thirty-eight,
thirty-two were instances of overconnectivity in ASD. Diffuse between-network overconnectivity may signify decreased network independence,
resulting in increased cross-talk between functionally-related, but independent networks. Also, dysregulated connectivity was found across all
regions of each network, including key lower and higher-order regions
involved in visual-attention, self-referential thought, and reward learning.

D14
PASSENGERS: THE DRIVING DISTRACTION WE CAN’T LIVE WITHOUT Michelle Chan1, Simbarashe Nyazika1, Anthony Singhal1; 1University of
Alberta — The human attention system is limited in capacity, and when per-

forming two concurrent tasks there is competition for cognitive resources.
This is particularly important in dangerous scenarios, such as driving a car
in heavy traffic where deficits in performance can be caused by various
sources of distraction, including the presence of passengers in the vehicle.
In the present study, 20 participants performed a dual-task paradigm to
examine the nature of attentional limits while operating a driving simulator
under cognitive load. The primary driving task had two levels of difficulty,
and we had conditions with and without a passenger present. We also collected event-related potentials (ERP) from a secondary competing task. Our
primary hypothesis was that the presence of a passenger would consume
more attentional resources, reflected in the morphology of the P300, particularly in the more difficult driving conditions. The results showed that
operators drove faster in the easy driving conditions, and that the dual-task
conditions compared to single task were associated with slower driving
speeds. As expected, we observed a decrease in P300 amplitude and an
increase in its latency from single to dual-task conditions. Importantly, the
presence of a passenger was associated with smaller P300 amplitudes in
both the easy and difficult driving conditions. Taken together, these data
show that in-car passengers may bleed away valuable resources in driving
situations that require more attentional focus in the first place.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
D15
TASK-EVOKED BRAIN ACTIVITY AFTER NEGATIVE INDUCTION
PREDICTS ENHANCEMENT OF MEMORY FOR NEUTRAL MATERIAL Morenikeji Adebayo1,2, Joseph Andreano1,2, Alexandra Touroutoglou1,2,
Bradford Dickerson1,2, Lisa Feldman Barrett1,2,3; 1Harvard Medical School, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, 3Northeastern University — Previous research

has shown that activity in regions of the salience network (SN) during the
encoding of negative stimuli predicts later successful subsequent memory
(LaBar & Cabeza, 2006). Behavioral experiments have also shown that
arousing experiences temporally adjacent to the encoding of neutral stimuli enhance memory (Anderson et al., 2006). We tested the hypothesis that
task-related activation of salience regions during a negative affect induction would predict enhancement of memory for neutral material on an
encoding task immediately following induction. 41 young adults each completed two scan sessions, approximately 1 week apart. In the first session
participants underwent a negative affect induction, then completed a neutral paired associate memory task. The second session was identical, except
a neutral pre-encoding affect induction was used. We measured memory

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

121

Poster Session D
enhancement (∆d’) by subtracting the signal detection score under neutral
induction from the signal detection score under negative induction. We
measured SN reactivity by contrasting activity during negative vs. neutral
affect induction. Linear regression was used to examine the relationship
between salience reactivity and ∆d’ due to affect. A significant relationship between induction activity and ∆d’ was found in two major SN nodes
(anterior insula & anterior cingulate cortex). A similar trend approaching
significance was also observed in the amygdala. These findings confirm
previous research that shows the motivational relevance of neutral material
can be enhanced by affect. They are the first to demonstrate that activity in
the SN during affect induction, prior to encoding, predicts the magnitude
of memory enhancement for neutral material.

D16
THE INTERPLAY OF CHOICE AND EFFORT ON OUTCOME PROCESSING Holly Sullivan-Toole1, Christina Bejjani1, Elizabeth Tricomi1; 1Rutgers
University-Newark — Both the level of effort expended and the provision of

choice can influence reward processing, either positively or negatively,
depending on the context. While previous work has begun exploring
these influences, little is known about the interactive effects of choice and
effort on reward valuation. To examine the neural underpinnings of this
potential interaction, we designed a physical effort task for use with fMRI
involving free- and forced-choice (Choice and No Choice) trials of varying
effort levels (Low- and High-Effort), disguised as a video game in which
subjects fight aliens using “blasters” charged manually by quick, repeated
button presses. Choice and effort conditions were not explicitly labeled but
were represented by blasters of different color categories. A 2x2 ANOVA
of subjects’ preference for the blaster stimuli revealed a main effect of effort
such that subjects preferred Low- compared to High-Effort blasters (p <
.0001). While there was no significant main effect of choice, the preference
for Low-Effort blasters was marginally greater when subjects got to choose
them than when these blasters were provided without choice (p = .062).
Neuroimaging results showed increased activation in regions within the
brain’s “reward” network, including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
and ventral striatum, for outcomes following Low-Effort compared to
High-Effort trials, in line with the ratings showing a preference for Low
Effort. Our results suggest that although both choice and effort may modulate preferences, this modulation may be more salient for effort than for
choice in the context of a physical effort task.

D17
THE TIME-COURSE FOR THE CAPTURE AND HOLD OF VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION BY FEARFUL FACES Erin Wylie1, Robert Torrence1,
Karen Reinke2, Joshua Carlson1; 1Northern Michigan University, 2University of
Illinois Springfield — Fearful facial expressions are important social signals

of potential environmental threat, which automatically capture observers’
attention. Fearful faces both facilitate the orienting of attention to their location as well as delay the disengagement of attention from their location.
However, little is known about the time-course for these orienting and disengagement effects. To address this knowledge gap we ran two dot-probe
studies in which we systematically varied the time-point in which attention
was sampled. Both experiments began with a central fixation point followed by two laterally presented faces. After which a dot was presented
on the left or right side of the screen. In Experiment 1, dots occurred 133ms,
266ms, and 532ms post-face onset and in Experiment 2, dots occurred 84ms,
168ms, 336ms, and 672ms post-face onset. Participants were told to locate
the dot as quickly as possible. Directed attention trials contained one fearful and one neutral face. Dots occurring behind a fearful face were labeled
“congruent” and dots appearing behind the neutral face were labeled
“incongruent”. Undirected baseline trials contained two neutral faces. In
Experiment 1, for both 133ms and 266ms conditions, reaction times were
fastest for congruent trials and slowest for incongruent trials with reaction
times for baseline trials falling between the two. The same was found for
the 84ms and 168ms conditions in Experiment 2. For the later times in both
experiments there was no significant difference between reaction times.
Overall, the results suggest that attention is captured and held by fearful
faces at times earlier than 300ms.

122

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

D18
EFFECTS OF ANXIETY ON NEURAL SIGNATURES OF EMOTION
CONFLICT PROCESSING IN OLDER ADULTS Jill D. Waring1,2, Ruth
O’Hara1,2, Amit Etkin1,2; 1Stanford University School of Medicine, 2VA Palo Alto
Healthcare System — The literature has shown an age-related decline in per-

formance on classic ‘cognitive’ executive function tests, like the traditional
color-word Stroop task. However, healthy older adults do not differ from
younger adults in distraction by task-irrelevant emotional stimuli, and
they experience lesser effects of emotional distraction across trials. There
is also a strong correspondence between poor emotion regulation and
impaired cognition in late life. The present study was designed to examine
the relationship between neural mechanisms of control over responses to
emotional distractors and measures of psychological wellbeing in healthy
older adults. Participants completed a face-word emotion conflict task
(fear, happy) during functional magnetic resonance imaging, as well as several neuropsychological measures of cognition and wellbeing. Facilitated
emotion conflict processing was observed on face-word incongruent trials
following another incongruent trial (i.e., emotional conflict adaptation),
as reflected in faster reaction times. There was no significant correlation
between accuracy or reaction times for emotion conflict adaptation and
reported trait anxiety (STAI). However, there were significant differences
in the neural signatures of emotion conflict adaptation as a function of anxiety. Results showed significant positive correlation between amygdala
activation for emotional conflict adaptation and trait anxiety. These results
further clarify the relationship between psychological wellbeing and effective control over responses to emotional distractors in late life.

D19
IMPACT OF DAMAGE TO HIPPOCAMPUS, AMYGDALA, AND VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX ON SOCIAL NETWORK SIZE
Janelle Beadle1, Melissa C. Duff1; 1University of Iowa — Medial temporal lobe

damage has been associated with subtle effects on social networks—
patients report network sizes comparable to healthy adults, but these relationships are primarily with family, with few friends acquired after brain
damage (Davidson et al., 2012). Here, we replicate this finding in patients
with hippocampal damage and anterograde amnesia (5 HC patients) and
extend this line of work by examining social network size in patients with
damage to neural systems critical for socioemotional processing, including ventromedial prefrontal cortex (4 vmPFC patients) and amygdala (2
HC+AMY patients) in comparison to healthy adults (NC=16). Using the
National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project questionnaire, we examined social networks in the four participant groups. Consistent with previous findings, HC patients reported social networks of similar size to NC
participants (HC: M=6.80; NC: M=5.25). HC patients reported comparable numbers of family members among their close friends to NC participants (HC: M=52.38%; NC: M=55.10%). Interestingly, memory severity
did not modulate social network size. HC patients with mild (N=2) and
severe amnesia (N=3) reported similar numbers of close relationships (HC
mild=6.50; HC severe=7.00). Patients with vmPFC damage and HC+AMY
damage reported having fewer close relationships than HC participants
(vmPFC=4.25; HC+AMY=2) and a greater proportion of those close relationships were with family members (vmPFC=70.00%; HC+AMY=100%).
Damage to neural systems critical for memory and/or socioemotional
processing may alter components of social networks differentially. Future
research further characterizing the relative contributions of memory function and socioemotional processing for social network size and quality is
warranted.

D20
ERP EVIDENCE FOR DISTINCTIONS IN PROCESSING SEMANTIC ASSOCIATIVE AND A VALENCE RELATIONSHIPS Nathaniel
Delaney-Busch1, Anne Choong1, Barbara Storch1, Jennifer Kurzrok1, Gina Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University, 2Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital — “Semantic priming” denotes the faster response to

“target” words preceded by “prime” words that are semantically associated
than to target words preceded by prime words that are semantically unassociated. Affective priming denotes the faster response to emotional words
preceded by words of the same versus opposite emotional valence. A large
event-related potential (ERP) literature suggests that semantic priming

2015 Annual Meeting
results in facilitated semantic processing, reflected by an attenuation of the
N400 to targets preceded by associated (vs. unassociated) primes. The ERP
signatures of affective priming, however, have been more mixed, and most
studies have not fully controlled for semantic association. We carried out
two ERP studies that fully crossed semantic (associated vs. unassociated)
and affective (same valence vs. opposite valence) relationships between
prime and target (SOA: 250ms). In Experiment 1, participants judged
whether each word pair was semantically related or unrelated, and in
Experiment 2, a separate set of participants judged whether each word pair
had the same (or opposite) valence. In both experiments, we saw clear N400
effects of semantic priming, as anticipated. However, we saw no effects of
affective priming on either the N400 or the late positivity ERP components.
Moreover, the effects of semantic priming on emotional and neutral words
were similar. These results provide evidence that the neural mechanisms
engaged in computing semantic relationships are distinct and independent
from those engaged in computing valence relationships.

D21
DOMAIN SPECIFICITY IN COGNITIVE FATIGUE IN TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURY: AN FMRI STUDY Glenn Wylie1,2,3, Helen Genova1,2, Nancy
Chiaravalloti1,2, John DeLuca1,2; 1Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers University - Medical School, 3The Department of Veterans’ Affairs — Cognitive fatigue, or fatigue

resulting from cognitive activity rather than physical exertion, is a pervasive and persistent problem for individuals who have sustained a Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), affecting between 60 and 90% of persons with TBI
in both the acute and chronic phases. Despite this, cognitive fatigue has
proven difficult to study because objective measures of performance, such
as response time, routinely fail to correlate with subjective reports of cognitive fatigue. In the current study, we used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) to study cognitive fatigue. We used a fatigue induction
paradigm in which cognitive fatigue was induced by a working memory
task (the n-back working memory task) and a processing speed task (the
modified symbol-digit modalities test [mSDMT]). We anticipated that the
n-back task would induce fatigue because working memory is known to be
affected in individuals who have sustained a TBI. Our results supported
this hypothesis: individuals with TBI reported more fatigue during the
n-back task than healthy controls (HCs), and they had more fatigue-related
brain activation in the basal ganglia (the caudate) than HCs. However,
during the processing speed task, this was not the case: individuals with
TBI did not report more fatigue during the mSDMT than HCs, and they
did not show increased fatigue-related brain activation during the mSDMT
than HCs. These results suggest that fatigue in TBI is process specific and
that this can be objectively measured with fMRI.

D22
THE EMOTIONAL CONTEXT MODULATES THE PROCESSING OF
THE MNEMONIC INSTRUCTIONS IN INTENTIONAL FORGETTING:
AN ERP STUDY Tzu-Ling Liu1, Daisy L. Hung1, Ovid J.-L. Tzeng1,2, Shih-kuen
Cheng1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central University, Taiwan,
Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan — Emotional materials are

2

usually better remembered than neutral ones. However, it is not yet clear
whether and how valenced memories resist to intentional forgetting. The
current study addressed this issue by examining the event-related brain
potentials (ERPs) elicited by the Remember and Forget cues to neutral
words that were embedded in a neutral or a negative context. At study,
participants were asked to associate a neutral word with a preceding negative or neutral picture. A Remember or a Forget cue was then presented
to signal whether the word was to be remembered or forgotten. In the
following test, participants made old/new judgments to the studied old
words and unstudied neutral words without the presentation of emotional
contexts. Behavioral data revealed interaction between emotions of backgrounds and memory cues, showing a lower recognition rate for to-be-remembered words paired with negative backgrounds. The analysis of the
ERPs time-locked to the study word found a significant emotional effect on
early attention-related and later word processing components. In addition,
the mnemonic cues presented in the neutral backgrounds elicited a more
positive-going waveform than those in the negative backgrounds. Interactions between emotion of context and memory cues were found during
325-400ms and 500-550ms post cue presentation, showing greater posterior
positive RF effect and frontal-central negative RF effect for neutral condi-

Poster Session D
tion respectively. We consider that emotional state may affect both selective
rehearsal to TBR words and inhibition to TBF words, however, the behavioral index may not be sensitive enough and showed only modulation on
TBR words.

D23
EFFECT OF A VIRTUAL REALITY TSST ON FOOD CHOICE AND
RISK TAKING David Fraser1, Michal Gould1, Tammy Schaeffer1; 1Chatham University — Stress plays a significant role in shaping many behaviors related to
choice and consumption of food. In this experiment, behavioral and physiological measures were collected to test hypotheses about the relationship
between stress and two behaviors: food choice and risk taking. Salivary
cortisol was measured from subjects that participated in a psychosocial
stress task followed by food choice and risk taking tasks. The stress task
was a modification of the Trier’s Social Stress Test (mTSST) that used a
virtual reality system to simulate an audience. The food choice task was
constructed using individual pre-test ratings of food items. The hypothesis was that the mTSST would elicit a sufficient cortisol release to both; a)
bias subjects towards choosing high-fat, high-sugar foods and b) more risk
taking behavior. The results support the conclusion that the virtual reality
mTSST evoked a mild stress response (as measured by cortisol change from
baseline), which encouraged healthier food choices without the expected
concurrent changes in risk-taking behavior. While this is in contrast to
much of the published literature, it is proposed that mild increases in cortisol levels may have a beneficial (healthy) effect on food choices, much in
the same way that mild cortisol increases benefit a multitude of cognitive
functions. In this sense, a little stress is a good thing.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
D24
HUMAN AMYGDALA STIMULATION EFFECTS ON EMOTION PHYSIOLOGY AND EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE Stephan Hamann1, David
Bass1, Cory Inman1, Robert Gross1, Jon Willie1; 1Emory University — The amygdala is a key structure mediating emotional processing. Few studies have
used direct electrical stimulation of the amygdala in humans to examine
stimulation-elicited physiological and emotional changes, and the nature
of such effects remains unclear. We stimulated the amygdala in epilepsy
patients undergoing iEEG monitoring. Stimulation of amygdala contacts
was contrasted with sham stimulation and lateral contact stimulation along
the same electrode. Frequency (50 Hz) and pulse width (300 μsec) were
held constant, while amplitude varied between lower (4 ≤ mV) and higher
(>4 mV) amplitudes in a stepwise fashion, with subjects blinded to stimulation condition. Skin conductance, respiration, and heart rate were recorded
while behavior was videotaped. Higher-amplitude amygdala stimulation
(but not lateral control or sham stimulation) elicited rapid and substantial
heart rate deceleration and increased skin-conductance, paralleling stimulation findings with animals and consistent with orienting/defensive
physiological responses observed with aversive visual stimuli. However,
no significant changes in mood or subjective emotional responses were
observed, suggesting that amygdala stimulation can produce physiological
changes associated with emotion without eliciting simultaneous changes
in subjective emotional state. Ongoing emotional responses to emotional
videos were also not interrupted by amygdala stimulation. More intense
stimulation may be required to elicit subjective emotional responses such
as fear that have been reported previously. In summary, these findings suggest that acute amygdala stimulation in humans is safe and can reliably
elicit changes in emotion physiology without significantly affecting subjective emotional experience, providing a useful paradigm for investigation of
amygdala-mediated modulatory effects.

D25
SECTION-SPECIFIC ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN CINGULUM
BUNDLE AND UNCINATE FASCICULUS MICROSTRUCTURAL
PROPERTIES AND POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS SYMPTOM SEVERITY Tong Sheng1,2, Keith L. Main1,2, Linda Isaac1,2, Jordan Nechvatal1,2, J. Kaci
Fairchild1,2, Salil Soman1,2, Ansgar J. Furst1,2, J. Wesson Ashford1,2, Maheen M.
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

123

Poster Session D
Adamson1,2; 1Palo Alto VA Medical Center, 2Stanford University School of Medicine — In posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), cognitive and affective

processes that enable appropriate behavior during stress become dysregulated, resulting in unwanted and unwarranted experiences of fear, anxiety,
and/or aggression. Abnormalities in the cingulum bundle and uncinate
fasciculus, two limbic system fiber tracts, have been shown to be associated
with PTSD. However, a precise mapping of section-specific relationships
between fiber tract microstructure properties and PTSD symptom severity is currently lacking. In the current study, Veterans (N=81; age: 23-71
yrs) underwent diffusion tensor imaging and completed a questionnaire
assessing current (i.e., last-month) PTSD symptom severity. White matter
microstructural properties (i.e., fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD)) of the cingulum bundle and uncinate fasciculus were calculated
using automated fiber quantification in individual sections along the entire
length of each fiber tract. Tract- and section-specific multiple regression
analyses, with FA and MD as predictors, were used to predict PTSD symptom severity. White matter microstructural properties in middle-posterior
right cingulum and posterior and anterior-middle right uncinate predicted
PTSD symptom severity. No sections of the left cingulum or right uncinate predicted PTSD symptom severity. These findings offer a detailed,
section-specific mapping of the relationships between limbic system fiber
tracts and PTSD symptoms. However, the modest effect sizes observed
(adj.-R^2: .050-.059) suggest that PTSD symptomology cannot be fully
accounted for by these two fiber tracts alone, and that additional networks
should be considered.

D26
EMOTIONAL PROCESSING BIASES FACE IDENTITY PERCEPTION
Regina C Lapate1, Alison Austermuehle1, Richard J Davidson1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — It is known that the processing of negative facial expres-

sions modulates encoding in ventral visual cortex and biases assessments
of subsequently presented faces in a valence-congruent manner (e.g., by
reducing likeability judgments). However, the extent to which such emotional processing goes beyond influencing subjective appraisals to bias face
perception in objective domains, such as identity recognition, is unknown.
To examine this, we conducted a two-phase experiment comprised of an
evaluative-conditioning task with two facial identities followed by an identity-recognition task embedded in an affective-priming procedure. During
evaluative conditioning, one facial identity was associated with repulsive
actions (CS+) and the other with agreeable actions (CS-). Six morphs of
these two identities were created to probe facial-identity recognition (55%,
58% and 61% per identity). Next, in the identity-recognition task, disgust
and happy facial expressions were presented for 16.7ms and followed by a
morphed face (CS+ or CS-) for 2s, and participants were asked to indicate
morph identity as accurately as possible in a 2-alternative forced choice
(2AFC) task. In half of the trials, prime awareness was prevented via backward masking. A significant two-way interaction between prime valence
and CS type on 2AFC accuracy (F(1,75)= 5.8, p = .018) indicated that recognition performance for the CS+ identity was improved when primed by
disgust (relative to happy) facial expressions (p = .008), regardless of prime
awareness or morph level. Thus, this study shows that emotional misattribution effects on face processing extend beyond subjective appraisals into
the domain of identity perception.

D27
MUSIC ANHEDONIA FOLLOWING FOCAL BRAIN INJURY: A
SELECTIVE LOSS IN MUSICAL PLEASURE Amy Belfi1, Erin Evans1,
Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Listening to music is often a highly plea-

surable experience. Pleasurable music activates brain regions important for
other highly rewarding experiences, such as food, sex, and drugs. Therefore, a loss of this pleasurable response to music is both notable and rare.
A selective loss of musical pleasure has been termed “music anhedonia.”
Currently, three isolated cases of music anhedonia have been reported,
although no group-level investigation into the neural structures underlying
music anhedonia has been undertaken. Here, we present a systematic investigation of music anhedonia in patients with focal brain damage. Two-hundred neurological patients with focal brain lesions were solicited to fill out
questionnaires that evaluate changes in musical preferences, experiences,
and behaviors after brain injury. An additional questionnaire was included
to collect information about the participant’s changes in musical behaviors

124

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
from a close friend or family member. Seventy individuals completed all
questionnaires. We identified eight individuals who showed a significant
decrease in their enjoyment of music following their brain injury. These
patients were identified as exhibiting ‘music anhedonia.’ Notably, these
individuals did not show anhedonia for other pleasurable experiences,
such as spending time with friends or enjoying a good meal. The individuals exhibiting music anhedonia post-brain lesion tended to have lesions
in emotion-related brain regions, such as the striatum, insula, and vmPFC.
Our results indicate a dissociation between a loss in enjoyment of music
and enjoyment of other pleasurable experiences.

D28
MOODIFY: A MOBILE HEALTH APP TO ASSESS CURRENT MOOD
STATE Mor Nahum1, Tom Van Vleet1,2, Vikram Rao3, Julie Mirzabekov3,4, Vikaas
Sohal3, Annika Rose1, Edward Chang3; 1Posit Science, 2Veterans Administration,
Martinez, 3UCSF, 4UC Berkeley — Assessment of current depressive and/or

anxious mood states may prove beneficial for clinical populations with
mental health challenges. Here, we report the development and initial
testing of an ecological momentary assessment strategy called ‘Moodify’.
This mobile health app incorporates both explicit and implicit measures
of cognitive-emotional processes to determine current mood states. Specifically, Moodify includes: (1) validated questionnaires (PHQ-9, GAD-7,
Rumination scale); (2) Immediate Mood Scaler: an assessment task in which
participants are required to rate their current mood on a continuum (e.g.
distracted-focused; sleepy-alert, etc.); and (3) implicit behavioral assessments designed to capture attentional biases typical of depression and anxiety (e.g., biased responses to sad, happy or neutral facial expressions). We
have pilot-tested Moodify in 30 healthy and depressed participants with
depression scores ranging from minimal to severe. Participants completed
at least one Moodify session, including all assessments described above.
We found that remotely-deployed (iPad) versions of the standardized measures of depression (PHQ-9) and anxiety (GAD-7) were highly correlated
(r=.89;p<.00001) with each other. Similarly, the correlation between the
PHQ-9 score and the novel IMS was high (r=.75;p<.00001). In addition, participants with moderate or severe depression were as accurate as non-depressed participants in identifying sad expressions, but their reaction time
(RT) to sad faces was longer (670±15.8ms vs. 621±23.2ms; p<.007), indicating attentional bias to sad affect. RT for sad expressions also correlated with
the severity of depression (PHQ-9; r=.44, p <.03). These data provide initial
validation of Moodify as a mobile health tool that accurately captures mood
states in individuals.

D29
FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI: A HIGH-RESOLUTION FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE STUDY OF EMOTIONAL PROCESSING. Stanislau Hrybouski1, Arash Aghamohammadi1,
Andrea Shafer1, Christopher Madan1,2, Corey Baron1,3, Peter Seres1, Fraser
Olsen1, Nikolai Malykhin1; 1University of Alberta, 2Boston College, 3Stanford University — The neuroanatomical substrate of emotional processing has been

studied using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) for a number
of years. While much of this research has focused on the amygdala, most
studies have not had the spatial resolution required to isolate the individual
amygdala subnuclei. In the present study we developed a high-resolution
fMRI protocol aimed at elucidating the functional significance of the amygdala subnuclei in emotional processing. Healthy volunteers rated images
of varying levels of emotional arousal in an event-related fMRI task. T2*weighted axial EPI volumes were acquired on a Varian Inova 4.7T scanner
(30 axial slices, TE = 19 ms, TR = 2000 ms, 74 volumes, resolution = 1.5 mm
× 1.5 mm ×1.5 mm). An ultra-high resolution structural T2-weighted 2D
Fast Spin Echo (FSE) scan (90 coronal slices, TE = 39 ms, TR = 11000ms,
resolution = 0.52 mm × 0.68 mm × 1.0 mm) was acquired for high-precision
manual segmentation of the amygdala into centromedial (CeM), basal (Ba),
and lateral (La) subnuclei groups. Activation results showed that the CeM
group experiences the greatest modulation of BOLD response based on the
emotional content of a stimulus. Furthermore, the CeM BOLD response
peaked significantly later compared to BOLD response of the other subnuclei. And because our intra-amygdala functional connectivity results
showed that there is little communication between La and CeM sucnuclei,

2015 Annual Meeting
we propose that emotional processing pathway in the human amygdala
flows from La to Ba to CeM, with the latter subnucleus group being most
sensitive to emotion.

D30
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER IS ASSOCIATED WITH IMPAIRED
PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL DISCRIMINATION LEARNING DURING
FEAR GENERALIZATION Lea M. Ahrens1, Andreas Mühlberger2, Andreas
Reif3, Gernot Langs4, Paul Pauli1, Matthias J. Wieser1; 1University of Wuerzburg,
University of Regensburg, 3Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 4Schoen Clinic,
Bad Bramstedt — Meta-Analyses found generalization of conditioned fear to

2

be a robust marker in the pathology of several anxiety disorders, such as
panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. As there exist no conditioning studies assessing overgeneralization
in social anxiety disorder (SAD), the current study examined whether it
also plays a role in SAD. Twenty-six patients with a diagnosis of SAD and
thirty healthy controls (HC) were conditioned to two neutral female faces
serving as conditioned stimuli (CS+: reinforced; CS-: non-reinforced) with
a fearful face paired with a loud scream serving as unconditioned stimulus
(US). Fear generalization was tested by presenting morphs of the two faces
(GS: generalization stimuli) which varied in their similarity to the original
faces. During the whole experiment self-report ratings and skin conductance responses (SCR) were recorded. Results revealed that SAD patients
rated all CS and GS as less pleasant and more arousing, and overestimated
the occurrence of the US compared to HC. Moreover, ratings indicated that
both groups generalized their acquired fear from the CS+ to intermediate GS as a function of their similarity to the CS+. Interestingly, only HC
showed the same pattern in the SCR, while SAD patients did not distinguish among the GS on a psychophysiological level. The findings point to
impaired discrimination learning in SAD patients, which may contribute
to the maintenance of SAD. Discrepancies between behavioral and psychophysiological measures might be explained by different underlying learning mechanisms (signal learning vs. evaluative conditioning).

D31
CORTICAL ACTIVATION DURING PHASIC FEAR AND SUSTAINED
ANXIETY – EVIDENCE FROM STEADY-STATE VEPS Anna K. Kastner1,
Paul Pauli1, Matthias J. Wieser1; 1University of Würzburg, Germany — Predictable

aversive events evoke a phasic fear response, while the unpredictability
of an aversive event can lead to a sustained anxiety response due to the
chronic expectation of threat. The present study aimed at differentiating the
electrocortical responses elicited by predictable and unpredictable threat,
using steady-state VEPs (ssVEPs) with frequency tagging, in a paradigm
with three different rooms and three associated persons to manipulate predictability. In one room, an aversive noise burst was cued by the appearance
of a person, in the second room the aversive noise was presented unpredictably, independently of the person’s appearance, while in a neutral control
condition no aversive sound was presented. SsVEPs and explicit ratings in
response to context and cue stimuli in all three conditions were recorded. A
fear response with enhanced ssVEP-amplitudes in response to the predictable cue compared to the neutral cue and an anxiety response indicated by
enhanced ssVEP-amplitudes in response to the context in the unpredictable
condition compared to the neutral condition were observed. Interestingly,
the context of the predictable condition elicited augmented ssVEP-amplitudes as well. On the explicit level, increased arousal and anxiety ratings
and decreased valence ratings for both context and cue in the predictable
and unpredictable condition were found. Results suggest that both predictable and unpredictable threat similarly receive increased attentional
resources, even when not signaling any immediate threat as for the context
in predictable condition. This indicates that in the presence of a threat cue,
attentional resources are also devoted to processing of the environment.

D32
ANTICIPATION TO EMOTIONAL STIMULI AND PSYCHOPATHY: AN
ERP STUDY Elvira Kirilko1, Amy Medina1,2, Ellen Reinhard1, Edward Bonfiglio1,
Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1John Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY, 2The Graduate
Center, CUNY — We examined the neural correlates of anticipation to emo-

tional images in college students with high and low psychopathic traits.
ERPs were recorded from adult males with either high or low levels of psy-

Poster Session D
chopathic traits while they viewed pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral IAPS
images. In a previous study (Medina et al., 2014), we found that students
with high psychopathic traits showed attenuated LPPs in response to these
emotional stimuli. Therefore, we predicted that anticipation responses to
emotional stimuli (indexed by the stimulus-preceding negativity [SPN])
would be smaller in the high than in the low psychopathic trait group. We
also hypothesized that viewing an unpleasant picture would increase anticipation for the next picture, as evidenced by a larger SPN, especially in the
low-trait group. In both groups, the SPN just before picture presentation
was greater after participants viewed unpleasant images than after they
viewed neutral images. However, there were no group differences in the
size of the SPN. In contrast, the SPN in an earlier window (just after picture
offset) showed group differences. Students in the low psychopathic trait
group showed a greater SPN after viewing erotic images than those in the
high group. Our results suggest that psychopathic traits in college students
affect their anticipation to emotional images.

D33
COST OR BENEFIT? TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION PRODUCES OPPOSITE BEHAVIOURAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS IN THE CASE OF MATHEMATICS ANXIETY Amar
Sarkar1, Ann Dowker1, Roi Cohen Kadosh1; 1University of Oxford — Transcranial

direct current stimulation (tDCS) has been used to induce benefits across
the psychological spectrum. However, there is little research on how individual differences might influence stimulation outcomes. We investigated
the role of trait differences in stimulation effects using the case of mathematics anxiety, the negative emotional response elicited by numerical
tasks. Participants with high and low mathematics anxiety were tested in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover experiment. tDCS was applied
to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex while participants performed a simple
arithmetic task. Stimulation produced opposite effects depending on the
level of mathematics anxiety. For high mathematics anxiety participants,
real tDCS significantly lowered both reaction times on the arithmetic task
and salivary cortisol concentrations (a biomarker of stress) in real compared to placebo tDCS. For participants with low mathematics anxiety, real
and placebo tDCS exerted precisely the opposite effects in reaction times
and salivary cortisol. Both groups exhibited a tDCS-induced cost, impaired
executive control on the attentional networks tasks. These behavioural and
physiological double-dissociations reveal tDCS can produce completely
different outcomes based on individual trait levels. These findings are
particularly important given the increasing excitement over non-invasive
brain stimulation techniques such as tDCS, and highlight the necessity of
investigating traits and situations where stimulation may not be beneficial.
Indeed, to our best knowledge, these are the first findings indicating tDCS
may produce impairments without any appreciable gains, as with the low
mathematics anxiety individuals, rather than merely having little to no
effect.

D34
THE MODULATION OF CLASSICALLY CONDITIONED FEAR GENERALIZATION WITH D-CYCLOSERINE: AN FMRI STUDY Tori EspensenSturges1, Alicia Kielbasa1, Philip Burton1, Kathryn Cullen1, Shmuel Lissek1; 1University of Minnesota — During conditioned fear generalization, learned fear

responses extend to a range of safe stimuli that resemble the original conditioned danger-cue. Although some amount of generalization is adaptive,
overgeneralizing fear to safe stimuli is a conditioning correlate of anxiety
disorders. As such, fear generalization may be a potential target for treatments of these disorders. To attempt modulation of fear generalization in
healthy participants, we used D-cycloserine (DCS), a partial agonist of the
NMDA receptor glycine site that has been shown to reduce conditioned
generalization in animals. Our generalization paradigm included 5 rings
of increasing size, with extreme sizes serving as conditioned danger-cues
(CS+: paired with electric shock) and conditioned safety-cues (CS-).The
rings of intermediary size served as generalization stimuli, creating a continuum of similarity between CS+ and CS- with which to assess response
slopes, referred to as generalization gradients. Participants received either
250mg of DCS, 500mg of DCS, or placebo before acquisition of conditioned
fear to the CS+ versus CS-. Twenty-four hours later, generalization was
assessed via presentation of the CS+, CS-, and the 3 intermediately sized
rings. Due to higher activations to the CS+, generalization gradients were

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

125

Poster Session D
steeper in the 500mg drug group versus placebo in bilateral anterior insula,
medial frontal and supplementary motor areas, and caudate, indicative of
reduced generalization. These findings suggest that enhanced memory consolidation of conditioned-fear by DCS, strengthens the retention of CS+/US
association, and renders the memory of the CS+ more readily retrievable in
the presence of stimuli that only approximate the danger cue.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal
maintenance & switching
D35
GENETIC CONTRIBUTIONS TO NON-NATIVE SPEECH LEARNING:
A NEUROCOGNITIVE APPROACH Sharon Noh1, Han-Gyol Yi1, W. Todd
Maddox1, Valerie Knopik2,3, John McGeary2,3,4, Bharath Chandrasekaran1; 1The
University of Texas at Austin, 2Rhode Island Hospital, 3Brown University, 4Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center — We examined non-native speech

category learning using a neurocognitive-genetic approach. In vision,
two competing dopaminergic category learning systems exist: a reflective
system mediated by the prefrontal cortex, and a reflexive system mediated by the striatum. Previous studies have shown that individuals vary in
speech learning performance as well as in strategy use, but optimal speech
learning is characterized by an initial reliance on reflective strategies and
an eventual transition to a reflexive strategy. We tested the hypothesis
that genetic predispositions may contribute to the individual variability in
speech learning. We focused on the well-studied COMT (SNP rs4680) polymorphism, which has been found to disproportionally modulate dopaminergic activity in the prefrontal cortex relative to the striatum and thereby
affects reflective processing. Young adults learned to categorize non-native
Mandarin tones in an MR scanner using trial-by-trial feedback. Initially, the
carriers of the dopamine-promoting Met-Met genotype showed enhanced
learning relative to the carriers of the dopamine-catabolizing Val-Val genotype. Functional magnetic resonance imaging results showed increased
prefrontal involvement during feedback processing in Met-Met carriers,
suggesting that the early Met-Met advantage was due to enhanced reflective processing. Val-Val carriers eventually showed enhanced learning
relative to Met-Met carriers. Computational modeling revealed increased
reflexive strategy use in Val-Val carriers towards the end of training, suggesting that the diminished prefrontal activity provided an advantage for
the competing striatally-based reflexive system. These results suggest that
the individual variability observed in speech learning may partly be due to
genetic factors that modulate the underlying neurocognitive mechanisms.

D36
BILINGUAL PROFICIENCY AND LEFT PARIETAL ACTIVITY DURING
NON-VERBAL TASK SWITCHING Kelly A. Vaughn1, Maya R. Greene1,
Aurora I. Ramos-Nuñez1, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of Houston — Previ-

ous research has examined the relationship between language and cognition in bilinguals. This study focuses on the unique contributions of first
and second language proficiency on cognitive control. The researchers
measured behavioral responses and fMRI activity in a group of 45 Spanish-English young adult bilinguals during the shape-color task, which
involves non-verbal task switching. Non-verbal cues presented after every
8-19 trials indicated whether participants should switch rules or continue
following the same rule for sorting stimuli by shape or color. Bilinguals
showed increased activity in the left parietal lobe (LIPL) to a greater extent
for switch trials than non-switch trials, and more for non-switch cues than
switch cues. Activity in this region during the trials was also positively correlated with Spanish, but not English proficiency. During the presentation
of the cues, activity in the LIPL was correlated with English, but not Spanish proficiency. These findings fit with the notion that the first language,
Spanish, is rooted in motor and perceptual abilities, skills that are necessary to respond to the trials. Conversely, the second language, English, is
more academic and cognitive, which is helpful for processing the symbolic,
non-verbal cues. Behavioral results indicate that English and Spanish proficiency are both negatively correlated with switch costs, which suggests
that better overall language skills are correlated with better cognitive con-

126

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
trol. Taken together these findings show that both language specific and
language general skills may be differentially related to separate aspects of
cognitive control.

D37
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF MULTITASKING PERFORMANCE
FOLLOWING TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY: BIGGER IS NOT ALWAYS
BETTER. Starla M. Weaver1,2, Jordan Grafman3,4, Glenn R. Wylie1,2; 1Kessler
Foundation, 2Rutgers University, 3Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, 4Northwestern University — A common disabling impairment following traumatic

brain injury (TBI) is a deficit in executive functions, including multitasking ability. The current study examined the neural correlates associated
with multitasking in persons with TBI using the task switching paradigm.
Participants with moderate-to-severe TBI and healthy controls performed
task switching while undergoing fMRI. Participants were instructed on the
performance of two simple tasks (Uppercase/Lowercase task and Consonant/Vowel task). Following instruction, participants were presented with
a series of letter stimuli, which afforded both tasks, and performed one
specific task on each stimulus. The experiment included pure task blocks,
in which participants performed the same task on each trial, and mixed
blocks in which participants switched between tasks in a predictable order.
Task performance resulted in more distributed areas of activation in persons with TBI than in healthy participants performing the same task. This
difference was particularly large in mixed blocks, in which participants
were required to switch tasks. Specifically, mixed block performance led to
increased activation in the right superior and middle frontal gyri, the right
superior parietal lobe, and bilaterally in the precuneus in persons with TBI.
Further, activation in these distributed brain regions was greater for TBI
participants who had poor accuracy than for those who performed well.
The results suggest that following brain injury multitasking becomes reliant on a more distributed group of brain areas, including greater reliance
on right hemisphere regions. However, use of these “compensatory” brain
regions does not result in superior performance.

D38
LANGUAGE SWITCHING FREQUENCY IN BILINGUALS IS INCONSISTENTLY LINKED TO EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONING Hunter Johnson1,
Oliver Sawi1,2, Kenneth R. Paap1; 1San Francisco State University, 2University
of Connecticut — Bilingual advantages in executive functioning (EF) com-

pared to monolinguals are generally believed to be constrained to certain
types of bilinguals and/or bilingual experiences (Bialystok, Craik, & Luk,
2012; Kroll & Bialystok, 2014). Recently, Verreyt, Woumans, Vandelanotte, Szmalec, & Duyck (2014) reported advantages of high-switch over
low-switch bilinguals in the magnitude of both Simon and flanker effects
and concluded that the frequency of language switching is a determining
component in reaping bilingual advantages in EF. Given their relatively
small n’s, 20 per group, confidence in the Verreyt et al. conclusion would
be bolstered by a successful replication. We repartitioned our composite
database of 168 bilinguals into two groups to re-test this hypothesis based
on the bilinguals’ responses to a five-point scale regarding how often they
currently switch languages: high-switch bilinguals reported switching
either several times a day or dozens of times a day whereas low-switch
bilinguals reported switching either a couple of times a week or a couple of
times a day. Eight separate one-way ANOVAs were conducted using eight
different measures of EF obtained through a Simon task, flanker task, and
color-shape switching task. There was no evidence supporting the hypotheses that switching frequency in bilinguals enhances the inhibitory control,
monitoring, or switching components of EF. Our results are also consistent with the results of three large-n experiments reported by Hernandez,
Martin, Barcelo, & Costa (2013) showing no language group differences in
switching costs for Spanish-Catalan bilinguals who have very high rates of
language switching.

D39
HIERARCHICAL ERROR REPRESENTATION GRADIENTS IN
MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CORTEX Noah Zarr1, Joshua Brown1; 1Indiana University — The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is reliably activated by errors.
However, it remains unknown whether error-related activity reflects a
scalar error signal, or if instead there are multiple error signals for different

2015 Annual Meeting
kinds of errors. Substantial evidence shows that lateral prefrontal cortex
(lPFC) is arranged in a hierarchy of abstraction, such that more abstract
concepts and rules are represented in more anterior cortical regions. Due
to the close interaction between lateral and medial PFC, one might expect
that mPFC would be organized along a similar rostro-caudal gradient of
abstraction, such that more abstract errors are represented more anteriorly,
and more concrete errors more posteriorly. Our aim was to investigate
whether error-related activity in mPFC reflected a hierarchy of abstraction
corresponding to a hierarchy of task rule switches. We predicted that when
more abstract rules changed unexpectedly (i.e., when the task environment violated participants’ predictions), the error-related activity in mPFC
would occur more anterior to the activity observed when less abstract rules
changed. Our findings matched our prediction, providing evidence of such
a hierarchy of abstraction in mPFC. This result further suggests that regions
of mPFC evaluate the rules maintained in correspondingly anterior regions
of lPFC.

D40
TAI CHI AND MEDITATION-PLUS-EXERCISE EFFECTS ON NEURAL
SUBSTRATES OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION. A CROSS-SECTIONAL,
CONTROLLED STUDY. Teresa Hawkes1, Wayne Manselle2, Marjorie Woollacott2; 1Air Force Research Laboratory, 2University of Oregon — We report the first

study of Tai Chi effects on the P300 event-related potential, a neuroelectric
index of human executive function. Tai Chi combines exercise and meditation. Exercise and meditation have been associated with enhanced executive function. Importantly, meditation includes yoga or other moderate
exercise. This cross-sectional study utilized the P300 event-related potential
(ERP) to compare executive network neural function between long-term
Tai Chi, meditation, aerobic fitness, and sedentary groups. We hypothesized because Tai Chi requires moderate aerobic and mental exertion, this
group would show similar or better executive neural function compared to
meditation, and aerobic exercise groups. We predicted all training groups
would outperform sedentary controls. 54 volunteers (Tai Chi, n = 10; meditation, n = 16; aerobic exercise, n = 16; sedentary, n = 12) were tested with
the Rockport 1-mile walk (estimated VO2 Max), a well-validated measure of aerobic capacity to document exercise effects, and an ecologically-valid visuo-spatial, randomized, alternating runs task switch test during
dense-array (256 electrodes), electroencephalographic recording at 250 Hz.
The P3b at electrode Pz was extracted using well-validated methods ( Electrical Geodesics, Incorporated). Only Tai Chi and meditation plus exercise
groups demonstrated larger P3b ERP switch trial amplitudes compared to
sedentary controls, though Tai Chi, meditation, and aerobic groups did not
differ significantly. These results suggest long-term Tai Chi, meditation
plus exercise, and aerobic fitness may similarly benefit the neural substrates
of executive function, but exercise requiring mental exertion may provide
superior benefits.

D41
WHAT’S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN REST VS. REST? DEFINING
BASELINE BRAIN STATES IMPORTANT FOR GOAL-DIRECTED
COGNITION Erica Pool1,2, Anthony J.-W. Chen1,2,3, Courtney L. Gallen1, Sahar
M. Yousef1,2,4, Michael A. Silver1,4, Mark D’Esposito1,2; 1Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, 2V.A. Northern California, 3University of California,
San Francisco, 4Vision Science, UC Berkeley — The neurophysiology of base-

line brain states at ‘rest’ have typically been studied during a task-free
period allowing unconstrained mind-wandering. Aspects of a ‘rest state’
have explained variability in cognition within and across individuals.
“Rest” likely involves differentiable states, but the nature of these states
has remained poorly defined. Indeed, we previously found that functional
brain network organization during a more defined form of rest (with an
attentional focus) predicted changes in cognitive functioning with training.
Here we turned to investigating differences in functional network organization for “focused” vs. “standard” rest. During two separate counterbalanced fMRI sessions, we asked 8 healthy young subjects to rest and gaze
at a fixation cross, but either focus on the cycle of their breathing or allow
the mind to wander. Subjects rated degree of focus vs. mind-wandering.
Whole-brain correlation matrices were generated from the AAL anatomical
atlas and used to calculate optimized global modularity, an index of connectivity within and between network modules. Given that prefrontal areas

Poster Session D
play a role in attention regulation, we calculated within-module degree
and participation coefficient for prefrontal nodes (measures of connections
within and across network modules, respectively). We found higher global
modularity (p=.05) and higher within-module degree in prefrontal nodes
(p<.05) during focused rest. These findings suggest that prefrontal nodes
are more functionally connected within organized modules during focused
rest than during standard rest, helping to define differentiable ‘rest’ states.
This approach provides a basis for further investigations of the nature of
baseline states from which goal-directed cognition is launched.

D42
NEURAL CORRELATES OF RECONFIGURATION FAILURE REVEAL
THE TIME COURSE OF TASK-SET RECONFIGURATION Marco Steinhauser1, Martin E. Maier1, Benjamin Ernst1; 1Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt — The ability to actively prepare for new tasks is crucial for achiev-

ing goal-directed behavior. The task-switching paradigm is a frequently
used tool to investigate this task-set reconfiguration. In the present study,
we adopted a novel approach to identify preparatory activity related to
task-set reconfiguration in event-related potentials. Our method was to isolate neural correlates of reconfiguration failure and to use these correlates
to identify the strength and time course of reconfiguration. To this end, we
employed a task-switching paradigm in which two types of errors could
be distinguished: task errors (in which the incorrect task was applied) and
response errors (in which an incorrect response for the correct task was provided). Because differential activity between both error types distinguishes
successful and failed reconfiguration, this activity was used as a marker
of the reconfiguration process. We found that, while reconfiguration takes
place on task repetitions and task switches, it occurred earlier in the former
than in the latter. Moreover, single-trial analysis revealed that the same
activity predicted response times as well as the magnitude of error-related
brain activity. Our results suggest that reconfiguration is not switch-specific and that the time course of reconfiguration is an important determinant of behavioral performance.

D43
QUANTIFYING THE INTERPLAY OF COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY AND
STABILITY IN PREDICITION USING FMRI Ima Trempler1,3, Anne-Marike
Schiffer2, Gereon Fink3, Ricarda Schubotz1,3; 1University of Muenster, 2University
of Oxford, 3University Hospital Cologne — In daily life, it is of crucial impor-

tance to adjust our expectations to environmental changes without losing
track of our action goals. We have to stabilize our predictions in the face of
potential distracters but also adapt them to altered circumstances. Recent
studies suggest that we build such internal models to predict upcoming
events and plan movements and actions in anticipation of those events.
However, it is not evident when to revise or shield an internal model.
This trade-off between cognitive flexibility and stability in prediction is
supposed to depend on individual differences in response bias and the
anticipated likelihood of updating demands. To assess the explicit and
implicit stabilization and flexibilization of prediction, we used fMRI while
twenty-one healthy subjects performed a modified serial prediction task.
Here, switches between predictable sequences had to be indicated via
button press while sequence omissions had to be ignored. This enabled us
to simultaneously measure flexible switching and inhibition of irrelevant
distractors whereby both type of trials occurred with a certain probability.
We observed mesial Brodmann area 10 activation during switch detection
while rejection of omissions was accompanied by lateral premotor cortex
activation and deactivation of Brodmann area 9. Behavioral results further
suggest that both functions depend on the volatility of environment as performance adapted to the probability of an event to occur. In line with recent
studies, this anticipation was accompanied by striatal activity. Our study
addressed for the first time the interplay of cognitive flexibility and stability
in a predictive setting.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

127

Poster Session D

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
D44
PRECISE PREDICTIONS: PERSONALITY PREDICTS THE RESOLUTION OF VWM REPRESENTATION Kristin Wilson1, Jason Rajsic1,
Justin Ruppel1, Jenny Shen1, Susanne Ferber1,2; 1University of Toronto, Canada,
2
Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Canada — Visual working

memory (VWM) performance varies between individuals and across the
lifespan. Evidence suggests that variance in the ability to control the selectivity of attention plays a critical role in VWM outcomes, however there
aren’t many well-established methods for predicting prowess in selective
attention. There is reason to believe, however, that personality may be a
critical predictor of attention, as these two psychological factors play a
mutually important role in shaping and constraining our experience of
the world and who we become. In the present experiment we explore the
question of whether personality might predict VWM parameters. We used
a colour-wheel change detection task with memory arrays composed of
circles and squares and we manipulated Set-Size (2, 4 & 6) and Attention
(Attend-All items or selectively attend to just the circles and Filter out the
squares). Employed the Bays & Hussain (2009) 3-factor model of VWM, we
calculated measures of precision/resolution, probability of target, non-target (swaps) and guess responses. We hypothesized that Conscientiousness
(associated with rule-following, attention to detail, self-control, etc.,) would
be related to the selectivity of attention and thus would predict VWM performance, particularly in the Filter condition when the selectivity of attention is taxed. Our results are consistent with our hypotheses, as we find
Conscientiousness to be predictive of the precision/resolution of VWM in
the Filter condition, however, this relationship does not exist in the AttendAll condition.

D45
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY IMPAIRMENTS FOLLOWING MEDIAL
TEMPORAL LOBE DAMAGE: A STATE-STRENGTH APPROACH Robin
I. Goodrich1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1; 1University of California, Davis — It is well

established that the medial temporal lobes (MTL), including the hippocampus, are essential for long-term memory. However, recent evidence indicates that the MTL also supports perception and working memory under
certain conditions, such as when strength-based judgments are necessary
for the successful detection of relational changes between scenes (Aly, Ranganath, & Yonelinas, 2013; Graham, Barense, & Lee, 2010). To examine the
extent to which sub-processes underlying visual working memory (VWM)
critically depend on the MTL we analyzed the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) of patients with MTL damage and healthy age-matched controls using a dual-process model in a standard change-detection paradigm
(Luck & Vogel, 1997). Compared to controls, patients with MTL damage
demonstrated significant VWM impairments. Interestingly, the difference
in overall performance was primarily driven by significant reductions
in patients’ strength-based judgments of change. Patients also exhibited
numerical reductions in state-based judgments, although this difference
was nonsignificant. These findings indicate that VWM is impaired following MTL damage, and that such deficits arise mainly from the inability of
patients to make quantitative strength-based judgments of change and less
so from an inability to make qualitative state-based judgments. By taking a
novel dual-process ROC analytic approach, we show that not all sub-processes underlying VWM are equally affected following MTL damage. These
results provide strong support for the use of methodologies that allow the
distinct sub-processes that contribute to VWM to be independently measured, rather than treating VWM as a unitary phenomenon.

D46
THE NEURAL BASIS OF IMPLEMENTING INSTRUCTED STIMULUS-RESPONSE RULES. Jelle Demanet1, Baptist Liefooghe2, Egbert Hartstra3, Dorit Wenke4, Jan De Houwer2, Marcel Brass1; 1Department of Experimental Psychology at Ghent University, 2Department of Experimental-Clinical and
Health Psychology at Ghent University, 3Donders Institute at Radboud University,
Nijmeghen, 4Institut für Psychologie at Humboldt-University, Berlin — The pres-

128

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
ent study was designed to investigate the processes that allow us to learn
on the basis of instructions. More specific, by using fMRI we were able
to focus on the neural mechanism that translates instructed information
about stimulus-response (S-R) mappings into ready-to-use procedural S-R
associations. Already some fMRI studies have shown that a fronto-parietal
network is involved when processing verbal instructions. By adapting a
novel behavioral paradigm for fMRI we found strong evidence that one
region in the right inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) plays a specific role in translating instructed S-R mapping into implemented S-R associations. First,
we found that this region is only involved when subjects implement these
rules and not when subjects simply maintain these same rules in working
memory. Second, we were able to show that higher activation in this region
during instruction presentation predicts better performance during the
later execution phase. Third, we showed that our manipulations affected
the behavioral index of the strength of this implementation process (which
we adopted from the behavioral literature) in a similar way as it affected
the activation cluster in the IFS.

D47
ARE ITEMS IN WORKING MEMORY STORED WITH LONG-TERM
MEMORY MECHANISMS? Nathan Rose1, Emma Meyering1, R. Shayna
Rosenbaum2, Steven Baker2, Christa Dang3, Bradley Buchsbaum3, Bradley
Postle1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2York University, 3Rotman Research
Institute — Are items held in working memory (WM) but outside of focal

attention (FA) retained via long-term memory (LTM) mechanisms? To
address this question we conducted an fMRI study in which we first
scanned healthy young adults performing a one-item WM task (i.e.,
delayed recognition of a word, a face, or a direction of moving dots), and
trained multivariate pattern classifiers to decode WM maintenance for the
three categories of stimuli. In a second phase, we scanned the participants
performing a two-item WM task (using the same categories of memoranda)
with retrocues that manipulated how long items were held in FA. Outside the scanner, we administered surprise LTM tests of declarative and
nondeclarative memory for items from the WM test. The multivariate pattern classifier successfully decoded items in WM that were actively being
attended to, but failed to find evidence for an active neural trace for items
held in WM but outside of FA. Subsequent word-stem completion priming
was insensitive to the amount of time an item was held in FA. Subsequent
cued recall and delayed recognition, however, was superior for items held
longer in FA. These results are inconsistent with the idea that unattended
memory items receive privileged encoding into LTM. To further test the
LTM memory account, these results will be compared to a developmental
amnesic with bilateral hippocampal lesions.

D48
HIGH-RESOLUTION WORKING MEMORY AND THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Alyssa Borders1, Charan Ranganath1, Andrew Yonelinas1; 1University of California, Davis — The idea that working memory (WM) is independent of the medial temporal lobes has been challenged by fMRI and patient
studies, but the findings have been mixed. Recent work has proposed that
the hippocampus is involved in working memory tasks that require the
binding of high-resolution information whereas it is not necessary for tasks
that require only low-resolution binding. To test this theory, we used fMRI
to compare hippocampal involvement in two similar WM tasks which have
different demands on the quality of information necessary to successfully
complete the task and have yielded conflicting findings in neuropsychological studies. In the current study, participants study an array of colored
squares and are asked to maintain the information over a 1-second delay.
At test, one location of the study array is cued. In the low-resolution condition, participants report whether the color in the cued square changed or
remained the same. In the high-resolution condition, participants report the
exact color of the cued location using a continuous color wheel. Changes
in the low-resolution condition switch from one distinct color to another
(e.g., purple to green) and do not require precise color information to successfully detect. In contrast, the high-resolution condition required participants retain the precise color information across the delay to discriminate
and report the correct color. Preliminary results suggest that hippocampal
activity predicts successful WM performance in the high-resolution task
but not the low-resolution task. This finding supports the prediction that
the hippocampus plays a role in high-resolution binding in WM.

2015 Annual Meeting

D49
BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT
STIMULATION ON WORKING MEMORY IN HIGH-FUNCTIONING
ADULTS WITH AUTISM Joseph Jason van Steenburgh1, Mark Varvaris1,
Tracy Vannorsdall1, David Schretlen1, Barry Gordon1; 1Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine — Specific Goals: To measure transcranial direct current stimu-

lation effects on working memory and identify responder characteristics
in high-functioning adults with autism (HFA). Participants and Methods:
Twelve adults with HFA (10 men; age=32 years; education=14 years; ADOS
score=11, KBIT-IQ=101) received separate counterbalanced sessions of
anodal, cathodal, and sham tDCS over the left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (DLPFC) while performing WMS-III digit and spatial span
backward (SSB) tests, letter and spatial n-back, and the Brief Test of Attention (BTA). Cohen’s D effect sizes and reliable change indices (Hageman
et al., 1993) were used to assess response to stimulation. Results: Anodal
(T-score=43, Cohen’s D=0.4, t=2.2, p= .05) and cathodal stimulation both
enhanced (T=48, D=0.6, t=4.9, p<.01) performance on the BTA compared
to sham (T=39), and improvement was correlated with age (anodal: r=.66,
p=.02; cathodal: r=.65, p=.02). Anodal (raw=9.6, D=1.3, t=3.3, p<.01) and
cathodal stimulation (raw=9.2, D=1.1, t=4.2, p<.01) both improved SSB performance vs. sham (raw=6.8). K-BIT Nonverbal IQ predicted anodal facilitation of SSB (r=.695, p=.012), while high ADOS scores predicted weaker
effects of cathodal stimulation on SSB (r=-.587, p<.05). Effects of anodal
(letter n-back average D=0.18; spatial n-back average D=0.25) and cathodal stimulation on n-back performance were small (letter n-back average
D=0.27; spatial n-back average D=0.19). N-back responding increased without improving d-prime, accuracy or speed. Conclusions: TDCS strengthened attentional control, which may have increased ability to manipulate
a greater informational load. As responders become better characterized,
tDCS may become a useful method for treating deficits related to prefrontal
hypoactivation in HFA.

D50
EFFECTS OF CONCUSSION ON WORKING MEMORY, SELECTIVE
ATTENTION, AND HEMODYNAMIC RESPONSE Nicholas J. A. Wan1, Allison S. Hancock1, Sandra L. Gillam1, Ronald B. Gillam1; 1Utah State University —
Investigations into concussions using neuroimaging techniques have indicated an increased activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
for working memory or selective attention tasks during the days after a
concussion-inducing incident. Previous findings also indicate a greater
consumption of oxygen in DLPFC during these tasks but have not spoken
to the increase in oxygen being received by the DLPFC. Two participants
who participated in a neuroimaging study of neural activation while completing memory (n-back) and attention (Stroop effect) tasks subsequently
suffered concussions and volunteered to repeat the testing while presenting
post-concussion symptoms. Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
was used to examine both the consumption of oxygen and the increase in
oxygen concentration within DLPFC. Behavioral results indicated no difference in accuracy or speed of responding for either n-back or Stroop tasks
between pre-concussion (2-back item accuracy: M = 30.6; Stroop: M = 32)
and post-concussion (2-back: M = 31; Stroop: M = 32) recordings. However,
fNIRS hemodynamic results revealed a greater consumption of oxygen and
also a greater increase in oxygen concentration while performing n-back
and Stroop tasks soon after concussion. Implications of these results can
factor into both the microstructural injury compensation hypothesis and
the neural efficiency hypothesis, in which task performance requires
greater resource consumption in order to reach typical behavioral accuracy.

D51
ON THE FATE OF IRRELEVANT MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS
IN VISUO-SPATIAL WORKING MEMORY: EVIDENCE BY A RETRO-CUING PARADIGM Daniel Schneider1, Edmund Wascher1; 1Leibniz
Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors — Directing atten-

tion toward representations in working memory serves for adapting the
stored information to behavioral goals. According to current theories, this
adaptation is associated with an active maintenance of relevant information
and a rapid decay of representations declared as irrelevant. By means of a
visual retro-cuing paradigm, we investigated the influence of such irrelevant working memory representations on further information processing.

Poster Session D
A retro-cue indicated if the items on the left or right side of a previous
memory array remained relevant. After a 700–1000ms delay interval, a central probe item was presented and participants had to state whether this
stimulus was previously shown on the relevant side of the memory array.
The probe was either a relevant memory item (“relevant probe”), irrelevant memory item (“irrelevant probe”) or was not shown in the previous
memory array (“new probe”). While the same response was required, the
“irrelevant probe” condition featured delayed response times referred to
the “new probe” condition. Thus although irrelevant working memory representations should decay rapidly, they still interfered with the processing
of the probe material. We further compared the different probe conditions
on ERP level and revealed a late left-frontal activation that was increased
for irrelevant compared to new probe items. This effect was accompanied
by an increased posterior positivity for irrelevant probes compared to new
probes subsequent to response. These results suggest that additional topdown control is required to actively suppress the residual representations
of irrelevant information in working memory and support the selection of
the required response.

D52
WORKING MEMORY AND VISUAL ATTENTION COMPETE FOR
NEURAL RESOURCES Anastasia Kiyonaga1, Emma Wu Dowd1, Tobias
Egner1; 1Duke University — We constantly employ working memory (WM)
to keep information in mind over short periods of time. This internal maintenance—which may be described as inwardly-oriented attention—often
co-occurs with immediate demands for attention in the environment. Such
external distraction can impede WM performance, yet we know relatively
little about how the brain manages simultaneous demands on internal
maintenance and external attentional processes. Here we acquired fMRI
data during a task that independently manipulates internal (WM) and
external (visual) attentional load. Participants remembered one or two
images (i.e., low vs. high internal load) for a delayed match-to-sample task.
During the delay, they performed a series of visual searches for target items
that were either highly distinct from or similar to visual distractors (i.e.,
low vs. high external load). Slower reaction times and lower task accuracy
during high load conditions confirmed that these manipulations were
effective. Likewise, high external load robustly activated the prototypical
fronto-parietal control network. A narrower set of brain regions—including
parts of the superior parietal lobule, lateral prefrontal cortex, and temporo-parietal junction—also displayed an interaction between internal and
external attention factors, demonstrating that the neural response to visual
attention demands depended on the level of concurrent WM load. Moreover, the degree to which WM and visual attention demands interacted
in these brain regions was predicted by individual visual search efficiency
and WM capacity scores. Thus, we have identified brain regions that may
underlie prioritization between internally- vs. externally-oriented attention
and whose activation varies with individual cognitive capacities.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
D53
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF PERCEPTUAL LEARNING FOR MANDARIN CHINESE LEXICAL TONE CATEGORIES:
AN ERP STUDY Guannan Shen1, Karen Froud1; 1Teachers College, Columbia
University — Whether native speakers of non-tonal languages can acquire
categorical representations of lexical tones and recruit native-like neural
mechanisms for lexical tone perception remains controversial. This study
investigates the nature of lexical tone categorization for three groups of
adult listeners: 1) native English speakers who had no exposure to Mandarin Chinese before age 17, but who took advanced Mandarin courses as
adults; 2) native English speakers with no experience of Chinese; and 3)
native Mandarin speakers. Two tonal continua were derived from natural
speech through interpolation within two tonal contrasts (Tone 1/Tone 4;
Tone 2/Tone 3). Firstly, the category boundaries were examined through
classic identification and discrimination tasks. Secondly, high-density EEG
was used to record brain responses while participants listened to tones in
two oddball paradigms: across-category and within-category. If perception
of lexical tones is categorical, cross-category deviants are expected to elicit
larger mismatch negativity (MMN) and P300 than within-category devi-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

129

Poster Session D
ants. Both behavioral and ERP results indicate that lexical tones are perceived categorically by native Chinese speakers but not by inexperienced
English speakers. Although English learners of Chinese demonstrated categorical perception in behavioral tasks, their MMN and P300 amplitudes
were significantly attenuated compared to native Chinese speakers, and
did not differ between within- and across-category conditions. The results
suggest that experience of learning Chinese did not change the ability of
these adult English speakers to process category boundaries for lexical
tones at early stages of auditory processing. Instead, such exposure may
modify perceptual boundaries in a top-down manner.

D54
WHITE MATTER CORRELATES OF POOR READING IN YOUNG
ADULTS: EVIDENCE FOR A COMPENSATORY RESPONSE Stephen
Bailey1, Laurie Cutting1, Sheryl Rimrodt1; 1Vanderbilt University — Reading is
important in academic settings but young adults in post-secondary education demonstrate widely variable basic reading skills. Previous diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) studies have correlated FA to reading skill, but have
not typically included a broad range of reading abilities. We hypothesized
that DTI in a sample of academically-focused young adults could reveal
information about neurobiological correlates of compensatory strategies.
Forty-six young adults (18-24 years old; 16 female) entering or attending
post-secondary education completed the Sight Word Efficiency subscale
of the Test of Word Reading Efficiency (TOWRE); standard scores ranged
from impaired to high average (SS=46 to 117; median = 100.0). Participants
underwent high-angular resolution diffusion-weighted imaging with
60 gradient directions in a 3T Phillips scanner. In FSL, image processing
included head motion and eddy current corrections, construction of fractional anisotropy (FA) maps using Camino RESTORE, and construction of
white matter skeletons using tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS). Using FSL
Randomize, non-parametric statistical analysis with threshold-free cluster
enhancement (5000 permutations) identified regions with significant FA
correlations to TOWRE raw scores. Results showed significant negative
correlations in bilateral anterior corpus callosum (cluster size = 710; p <
0.05) and left anterior forceps minor (cluster size = 2187; p < 0.05) overlapping the uncinate fasciculus. Thus, our less skilled readers show greater
coherence of white matter tracts connecting left frontal lobe (near Broca’s
area) to right frontal lobe. Consistent with functional neuroimaging-based
theories about dyslexia, our findings may represent structural refinement
of pathways that facilitate compensatory recruitment of right inferior frontal gyrus.

D55
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN GRAMMAR UNDERSTANDING
IN PRESCHOOL CHILDREN Sergey Kiselev1; 1Ural Federal University — The
goal of the research was to reveal the age-related differences in understanding different type of grammatical constructions in Russian-speaking preschool children. The sample consisted of 45 4-year-olds, 48 5-year-olds, 56
6-year-olds typically developing children from Russia. The children were
assessed with the task “Comprehension of grammatical structures” from
Luria’s child neuropsychological assessment battery. The first part of this
task was designed to assess comprehension of reversible passive sentences.
The second part of the task was designed to assess comprehension of sentences with prepositions that indicate the spatial relations between objects.
One-way ANOVAs by group revealed significant differences between the
groups for scores in the comprehension of reversible passive sentences.
However we did not reveal significant differences between the groups for
scores in the comprehension of sentences with prepositions that indicate
the spatial relations between objects. The obtained result shows the heterochronicity in the development of different aspects of grammar understanding in preschool children.

D56
THE DEVELOPMENT OF WHITE MATTER REGIONS INVOLVED
IN FOREIGN SPEECH SOUND PRODUCTION Mary Elizabeth Sutherland1,2,3,4, Pierre-Yves Herve5, Tomas Paus6, Robert J. Zatorre1,2,3; 1Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, CANADA, 2BRAMS
International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research, Montreal, QC,
CANADA, 3CRBLM Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music, Montreal,

130

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
QC, CANADA, 4Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencias, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Santiago, CHILE, 5Groupe d’Imagerie Neurofonctionnelle,
Université Bordeaux Ségalen, Bordeaux, FRANCE, 6Rotman Research Institute,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, CANADA — Previous research has shown

that adults who are more accurately able to produce a foreign consonant,
the voiced uvular stop found in the Persian language, have higher white
matter (WM) density in the left insular/prefrontal cortex and in bilateral
inferior parietal cortices. It is unclear, however, whether these anatomical differences evolve during development or whether they reflect more
stable underlying structural traits. The current study addressed this question using a longitudinal design with 43 healthy, right-handed, native
English-speaking adolescents. Anatomical MRI scans were obtained from
these participants at the age of 10, 11.5, and 13 years; at the age of 14.5,
their ability to produce the voiced uvular stop was tested. Two independent judges scored the accuracy of the utterances. Using these scores as
regressors in a voxel-based morphometry analysis revealed that the regions
of WM density correlating with these scores varied at each time point. At
the age of 10, the network that predicted the ability to pronounce foreign
speech sounds at age 14.5 encompassed WM in the left inferior temporal
gyrus, left middle frontal gyrus, bilateral heschl’s gyrus, and finally the left
insular cortex. By the age of 13, this network had become more specific
and adult-like, with WM in bilateral insular cortex being the main predictor
of speech scores, although the correlation was only significant in the right
hemisphere. Taken together, these results suggest that the structural correlates found in adults are not the same as those in pre-pubertal children,
but instead that they emerge with maturity.

D57
STRUCTURAL BASES OF LANGUAGE-IMPAIRMENT IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT AUTISM Michelle Han1, Zhenghan Qi1, Kelly
Halverson1, Lisa Wisman Weil2, Helen Tager-Flusberg2, Kenneth Wexler1, John
Gabrieli1; 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2Boston University — Lan-

guage impairment is a behavioral phenotype for autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). However, it is unclear whether language-impairment in children
with and without autism share a structural basis. In this study, we explored
whether measures of white matter integrity would provide insight into
the distinction between groups of children with language impairment (LI)
and ASD by contrasting them with a group of typically developing (TD)
children. Group designations were defined by in-study results from the
Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (CELF) and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS). 42 children (mean age=12.27; mean
IQ=110.2; 14 per group; matched for age and IQ) were scanned in an MRI
scanner. During the scan, diffusion-weighted images (DWI) with 30 directions were acquired from which individual subjects’ white matter tracts
were reconstructed. The average mean diffusivity (MD) of the left anterior
thalamic radiation (ATR) was significantly different between the TD and LI
groups (two-tail p=0.0058) and the TD and ASD groups (two-tail p=0.0021)
but not between the LI and ASD groups (two-tail p=0.67), which suggest
the left ATR is common to language-impairment with and without autism.
In contrast, average MD in the right inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF)
was significantly different between the TD and LI groups (two tail p=0.011)
but not between the TD and ASD groups or the LI and ASD groups, which
suggest the right ILF is unique to language-impairment without autism.
Together, these results point to both overlapping and distinct structural
bases for language-impairment in children with and without autism.

D58
REDUCED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN NEURAL LANGUAGE
SYSTEMS IN PERSONS WITH AGE-RELATED MACULAR DEGENERATION Jie Zhuang1, David Madden1,2, Xuan Duong-Fernandez1, Ying-hui
Chou1, Micah Johnson3, Michele Diaz4, Scott Cousins5,6, Guy Potter1,2, Nan-kuei
Chen1, Heather Whitson5,7,8; 1Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke University Medical Center, 2Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke
University Medical Center, 3Department of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, 4Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University, State
College, 5Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, 6Duke
Eye Center, Duke University Medical Center, 7Department of Medicine, Duke

2015 Annual Meeting
University Medical Center, 8Durham VA Medical Center — Recent research has

found that visual loss in age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the
most common cause of blindness in Americans, is associated with lower
performance on verbal fluency tasks. However, the neural underpinning
of a connection between AMD and impaired language processing remains
unclear. Here we investigated intrinsic functional connectivity strength
among regions within the fronto-temporo-parietal language networks in
AMD patients and how these connectivity patterns differ from those in
healthy controls. We performed seed-based whole brain connectivity analysis on resting state scans of 11 AMD patients (mean age 74.4 ± 6.6) and 11
controls (mean age 72.5 ± 1.6). We observed significantly reduced connectivity among low-level visual processing regions (V1 and lateral occipital
complex) in patients compared to controls, indicating expected damage of
visual function pathways associated with AMD. Similarly, AMD patients
exhibited weaker connections in typical language networks (between left
inferior frontal gyrus (BA 45/47) and angular gyrus/posterior middle
temporal gyrus) than controls. In contrast, patients and controls generated
similar connectivity patterns in low-level acoustic processing regions (bilateral Heschl’s gyri and surrounding superior temporal gyri), indicating that
observed group differences in connectivity were region-specific rather than
global. Our finding that AMD is associated with weaker functional connectivity among low-level visual processing regions and major connections
within language networks suggests that AMD may be a disease with specific consequences for both eye and brain. Longitudinal research is needed
to understand whether AMD-related brain changes are causally mediated
or reflect shared risk factors for neurodegeneration in retina and brain.

D59
READING THE FUTURE: CONTEXT MAINTENANCE AND TASK
DEMAND AFFECT PREDICTION IN ELDERLY READERS Shruti Dave1,
Trevor Brothers1, Matthew Traxler1, Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California,
Davis — Language in elderly adults concurrently benefits from lifetime

vocabulary exposure and is challenged by requiring active online processing. Changes in crystallized and fluid intelligence can influence language-related electrophysiological components, which in elderly subjects
are typically reduced in amplitude and delayed in time (reviewed in Federmeier, 2007). The source of this age-related difference may be linked to
deficits in anticipation for upcoming words, or alternatively, by an overall
delay in lexical processing. In a previous study with young adult readers, the effects of specific lexical predictions were assessed by separately
averaging ERP trials with accurate and inaccurate predictions (Brothers,
Swaab, & Traxler, in press). In this study, prediction accuracy had a large
independent effect on N400 amplitudes that preceded the effects of contextual support by approximately 100ms. In the current study, this task
was replicated in elderly adults. Behaviorally, older adults reported equal
levels of prediction accuracy as younger adults. Older adults also showed
a similar latency delay between the effects of prediction accuracy and contextual facilitation, but the onset of these effects was approximately 60ms
later compared to young adults. These results suggest that deficits in lexical prediction cannot explain the overall delay and reduction of contextual
facilitation in elderly adults. Additionally, in comparison to a high-low
cloze comprehension task, young adults’ cloze effect latency was identical
with or without the addition of the prediction task. However, older adults’
effect latency was significantly delayed between comprehension-only and
prediction-added tasks, indicating a likely detrimental role of increased
load and task demand.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
D60
INCREASED FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN THE CINGULO-OPERCULAR NETWORK DURING REST IN CHILDREN WITH
DYSLEXIA FOLLOWING INTERVENTION Tzipi Horowitz-Kraus1, Mark
DiFrancesco1, Claudio Toro-Serey1, Scott Holland1; 1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center — The goal of the current study is to define the effects

of executive-function-based reading training on functional connectivity of
the cingulo-opercular-network and reading performance in children with
dyslexia and in typical readers. Method Fifteen children with dyslexia and
17 typical readers (8-12 years old) were included in the study. Reading and

Poster Session D
executive function neurocognitive tests as well as 5.5 minutes of resting
state fMRI data were collected before and after training. Training on the
Reading Acceleration Program (RAP) was done in English 5 times per week
for 4 weeks. Imaging data were analyzed using the CONN toolbox: a graphical network modeling tool. Results Both groups showed greater reading
and executive-function scores post training, with greater gains among the
dyslexia group. Both groups showed an increasing functional connectivity
in the cingulo-opercular-network with training time: [F(1,30)=9.024,P<.01)].
Paired t-test analysis revealed that children with dyslexia showed significantly increased functional connectivity in the cingulo-opercular-network
[t (14)=-3.59,P<.01]. Conclusions 1) Increased functional connectivity in the
cingulo-opercular-network after training in children with dyslexia demonstrates the importance of cognitive control during reading in this population; 2) These results are in line with previous findings of greater error
monitoring activation after training in children with dyslexia and confirm
greater gains with RAP training in this group.; 3) Training may have less
effect on cognitive control in typical readers and more direct effect on the
visual area, as previously reported; and 4) A future study should also examine the effects of training on the fronto-parietal cognitive-control-network.

D61
NEURAL MEASURES OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL IN NON-NATIVE LEXICAL ACCESS Kailen Shantz1, Darren Tanner1; 1University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign — Second language (L2) learners experience persistent
difficulty using grammatical gender in an L2, even at high levels of proficiency. Recent research has further suggested that these difficulties stem
from processing problems, not basic learnability problems (Grüter et al.,
2012). We used ERPs to investigate processing-based loci for these difficulties using a covert picture naming task. We specifically focused on the
time course and cognitive load associated with gender and phonological
information retrieval in native English speakers who were proficient in L2
German using the dual-task go/no-go paradigm. Previous research using
this paradigm with native speaker populations has found that grammatical gender information is retrieved before phonological information (Van
Turennout et al., 1998). Our preliminary results show no clear latency
advantage on the no-go N200 response for grammatical gender over phonology, in contrast to the previous findings with native speaking populations. Moreover, results show a larger amplitude P300 “go” effect for the
go/no-go decisions based on phonological information compared to those
based on grammatical gender information. Overall these findings suggest
that possible loci for second language difficulties with online use of grammatical gender may stem from: 1) delays in the time course of gender feature retrieval, relative to phonology, as indicated by the N200 results and
2) the possibility that the use of grammatical gender information is more
cognitively taxing compared to the use of phonological information, as suggested by the P300 results.

D62
GRAY MATTER CHANGES IN CHINESE VOCABULARY LEARNING
Jennifer Legault1, Shin-Yi Fang1, Indy Majere2, Yu-Ju Lan2, Ping Li1; 1The Pennsylvania State University, 2National Taiwan Normal University — Learning of vari-

ous cognitive tasks has been associated with changes in both neural activity
and gray matter volume (see Li, Legault, &Litcofsky, 2014 and Lövdén et
al., 2013 for reviews). Our study used a longitudinal design with structural
neuroimaging to examine how learning of a second language (L2) may
lead to corresponding changes in the brain. We used whole brain and a
priori designated region of interest (ROI-based voxel based morphometry
(VBM) analyses to parse out regions that showed increased gray matter
(GM) volume as a function of L2 learning, and whether these changes are
mediated by individual differences in cognitive tasks. To examine possible effects of learning environment, we randomly assigned participants
to either picture-word (PW) association learning context or to a virtual
environment (VE; www.secondlife.com) learning context. After each learning session, participants performed a forced choice recognition task. Participants in the PW reached high accuracy in fewer sessions than the VE
group; however both groups performed near ceiling at the end of training.
VBM analyses show that GM volume in the left inferior frontal gyrus was
associated with L2 vocabulary performance. The VE group showed greater
volume in the left inferior parietal lobe as compared to the PW group at
the end of training. Further, GM volume in the right middle frontal gyrus

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

131

Poster Session D
and inferior parietal lobule were associated with performance on cognitive
tasks. In conclusion, our study shows that learning Chinese vocabulary is
associated with GM volume in regions implicated with cognitive control.

D63
DIFFERENCES IN P1 AND N170 ERP COMPONENTS FOR DEAF
VS. HEARING READERS Casey Kohen1, Katherine J. Midgley1, Phillip J.
Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2, Karen Emmorey1; 1San Diego State University,
CNRS & University of Provence — Visual word recognition generally exhibits

2

a left-lateralized asymmetry for the N170 ERP component, which is interpreted as reflecting expertise in processing visual word forms in highly
automatized adult readers and is suggested to reflect activity in the visual
word form area (VWFA). We report a different pattern of early ERP components in deaf individuals reading in their less fluent L2 (English). EEG from
32 channels was collected in 15 congenitally deaf and 15 hearing adults presented with 60 words (e.g., TABLE) and 60 symbol strings (e.g., %$#@+) in
a familiarity judgment task (is this item familiar?). We measured the amplitude of the P1 and following N170 over left and right hemisphere posterior
electrode sites (O1 vs. O2 and T5 vs. T6). Hearing readers showed the classic left more negative than right ERP pattern for words starting as early as
100 ms (i.e., P1) and continuing through the N170 epoch (250 ms). Symbol
strings produced a similar pattern but the asymmetry was less notable. In
contrast, deaf readers showed a different pattern. For symbol strings the
N170 was slightly more negative over the right hemisphere. For words the
P1 and N170 were both larger over the left hemisphere (i.e., the P1 was
more positive and the N170 more negative), although the N170 asymmetry
was not nearly as large as for hearing readers. This pattern likely reflects
the overall lower reading competence in the deaf readers (smaller N170
asymmetry) as well an earlier perhaps attentionally mediated enhancement
(P1) due to deafness.

D64
THE AUDITORY KILOWORD STUDY: ERP EVIDENCE FOR TASK
SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF PHONOLOGICAL NEIGHBORHOOD DENSITY DURING SPOKEN WORD RECOGNITION Kurt Winsler1, Katherine
J. Midgley1, Phillip J. Holcomb1, Jonathan Grainger2; 1San Diego State University, 2CNRS & Université de Provence — A number of previous studies have

indicated that certain characteristics of visually presented words produce
systematic differences in the timing and amplitude of various ERP components. The present study extended this work to auditory word recognition.
Specifically, we investigated electrophysiological effects of phonological
neighborhood density, orthographic neighborhood density, and word frequency on auditory word recognition. Two different go/no-go tasks were
used; lexical decision (LD) and semantic categorization (SC). Thirty-two
channels of EEG were collected from 27 monolingual English-speaking
adults while they listened to a list of 960 words (480 each in LD and SC).
Overall, and consistent with previous visual word studies, the results indicated that words with many phonological or orthographic neighbors as well
as words that were low in word frequency elicited larger N400s than words
from small phonological or orthographic neighborhoods and words that
were high in word frequency. Importantly, the frequency and orthographic
neighborhood effects remained unchanged across the two tasks. However,
the N400 effect for phonological neighborhood density was significantly
greater during the LD than in the SC task. This finding is consistent with the
hypothesis that making auditory lexical decisions leads listeners to focus
on the phonological level of processing which in turn enhances the effect
of the number of phonological competitors. Making semantic decisions, on
the other hand, does not require this kind of focus. This pattern provides
further evidence of the influence of top-down task effects on the neuro-cognitive underpinnings of word recognition.

D65
BILINGUALS’ ANTERIOR CINGULATE REFLECTS BOTH NATIVE
AND SECOND LANGUAGE NORMS DURING NATIVE LANGUAGE
PRODUCTION Tianyang Zhang1, Benjamin Zinszer2, Ruiming Wang3, Ping
Li1; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2Pennsylvania State University & University
of Rochester, 3South China Normal University — Recent research has demonstrated that variation between native speakers and cross-language transfer
are both important influences on bilinguals’ lexical semantics (e.g., Ameel

132

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
et al., 2009; Zinszer et al., 2014). In the present study, we examined how
native speakers’ lexical semantic variability modulates the neural processes
underlying bilingual language production. Two groups of native Chinese
speakers (11 monolinguals and 11 Chinese-English bilinguals) named 183
objects from approximately thirty lexical categories (e.g., cup) while undergoing fMRI scanning. For each object, we normed two lexical variables
based on responses from monolingual norming samples in English and
Chinese: Name Agreement and the number of Alternate Names describe
unique variations in each language’s categories for individual object exemplars (e.g., various shirts or trucks). We selected three left-hemisphere anatomical ROIs based on dominant models of word production (e.g., Rodriguez-Fornells et al., 2009; Price, 2012) to examine their correlation with
Agreement and Names norms: anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), pars triangularis (PTri), and middle temporal gyrus (MTG). The fMRI results indicate that Chinese monolinguals’ activity in ACC and PTri was significantly
correlated with Names for each object (p<0.001, uncorrected). Variation
in MTG was marginally related to Agreement (p=0.005). Chinese-English
bilinguals’ ACC activity was correlated with both Chinese (p=0.003) and
English Names (p<0.001). Our findings point to the functional involvement
of both languages’ lexical semantics in bilinguals’ native language production. The results also suggest that these ROIs are involved in bilinguals’
cross-language conflict monitoring and selection, consistent with the extant
bilingual imaging literature (e.g., Abutalebi et al., 2012).

LANGUAGE: Other
D66
BILINGUALS DEMONSTRATE INCREASED CORPUS CALLOSUM
VOLUME Christine Chiarello1, Aurora I. Ramos2, David Vazquez1, Maya R.
Greene2, Adam Felton1, Alessandra McDowell1, Arturo E. Hernandez2; 1University
of California, Riverside, 2University of Houston — Are there neuroanatomical

correlates of bilingualism? A recent review noted mono/bilingual differences in regional cortical volume/density, primarily in left hemisphere language areas, but there has been little direct examination of left/right asymmetries (P. Li et al., 2014). We found similar cortical thickness asymmetries
for these groups in language relevant cortex, but reversed rightward cortical thickness asymmetry in the anterior cingulate for bilinguals (Chiarello
et al., 2014). Here we describe companion analyses that examined corpus
callosum volume to determine structural correlates of interhemispheric
transmission. Two MRI scans were obtained for 78 right-handed young
adults [39 monolingual English, 39 bilingual Spanish-English (mean L2
age of acquisition 6.8 years), age- and gender-matched]. The FreeSurfer
pipeline was used to segment the corpus callosum into 5 subregions (anterior, midanterior, central, midposterior, posterior). Callosum volume was
regressed against total intracranial volume and the residuals were used to
obtain callosum volume estimates unbiased by overall brain size. Total callosum volume did not differ between groups (p = .12), but bilinguals had
greater volume in midanterior t(38) = 3.32, p < .002, and central t(38) = 2.65,
p < .01, subregions. DTI data indicate that these callosum subregions maximally interconnect cingulate and superior frontal cortex (Park et al., 2008),
and that anteromedial superior frontal cortex is strongly interconnected to
anterior and mid-cingulate areas (critical nodes of the cognitive control and
default mode networks) (W. Li et al., 2013). The current data suggest that
bilingualism may be associated with altered interhemispheric dynamics in
regions associated with cognitive control.

D67
THE NEURAL TRAJECTORY OF ADULT SECOND LANGUAGE
ACQUISITION: AN FMRI STUDY OF LEARNING A REDUCED NATURAL LANGUAGE Kaitlyn M. Tagarelli1, Xiong Jiang1, Kyle F. Shattuck1, Itziar
Laka2, Aron K. Barbey3, John W. VanMeter1, Kara Morgan-Short4, Alison Mackey1,
Aron J. Newman5, Peter E. Turkeltaub1, Elissa L. Newport1, Michael T. Ullman1;
1
Georgetown University, 2University of the Basque Country, 3University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, 4University of Illinois at Chicago, 5Dalhousie University
— What are the neurobiological substrates of adult second language (L2)
acquisition, and how do they change with increasing exposure and proficiency? Though understanding the learning of a full natural language is
the goal of language acquisition research, it is logistically impractical to

2015 Annual Meeting
longitudinally investigate the entire course of L2 learning from initial exposure to advanced proficiency, since this process takes many years. The current study aims to address this problem and resulting gaps by examining
the learning of a reduced natural language, using continuously acquired
behavioral and fMRI measures. Nineteen English native speakers (8 female;
mean age = 20.6 years) were trained on a subset of real Basque words and
sentences. Learners achieved very high proficiency in vocabulary (98%
accuracy) and reasonably high proficiency in grammar (82%) after only
a few hours of training in the MRI scanner. Within grammar, syntactic
word order was learned quite well, whereas morphosyntactic agreement
was more difficult. Preliminary fMRI analyses indicate involvement of the
hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures in early
word and grammar learning, followed by increased activation in areas of
the inferior frontal gyrus involved in lexical retrieval (e.g., BA45/47) and
the processing of automatized procedural skills (e.g., BA44). Additionally,
basal ganglia activation increased for syntactic word order over the course
of learning. The results have implications for neurobiological models of
language learning, most clearly supporting the Declarative/Procedural
Model, as well as more generally informing the neurobiology of the language learning process.

D68
NAMING IN SPANISH, ENGLISH, OR MIXED CONDITIONS DIFFERENTIALLY MODULATES CONNECTIVITY STRENGTHS AMONG
COGNITIVE CONTROL REGIONS IN BILINGUALS Aurora I. RamosNuñez1, Maya R. Greene1, Kelly A. Vaughn1, Arturo E. Hernandez1; 1University of
Houston — Previous imaging and language impairment research has shown

evidence of a cognitive control mechanism needed for bilinguals’ management of two languages, which involves areas in the prefrontal, inferior parietal and anterior cingulate cortices, and basal ganglia, and has been implicated in executive function processes. However, previous research has not
discussed how these areas interact during language switching and how
they are connected in the healthy bilingual brain. The purpose of this study
was to examine modulatory effects of picture-naming language conditions
on cognitive control network interactions using Dynamic Causal Modeling (DCM). Spanish-English young adult bilinguals (n=47) participated in
this experiment. Participants named objects in three conditions: Spanish
only, English only and mixed (alternating between Spanish and English)
in a picture-naming task while inside the scanner. Effective connectivity
was examined among prefrontal, parietal, and caudate and an object recognition region (fusiform gyrus) during the three conditions. Bayesian
Model Selection (BMS) analyses revealed that the model representing the
Spanish and English conditions showed greater influence on connectivity
among the four regions examined. The mixed condition had no modulatory
influence on any of the connections. These results suggest that this group
of bilinguals may not be accustomed to switching between their two languages, leading to weak brain connections. Conversely, speaking in Spanish and English requires brain processes that may be more practiced than
those used in language switching, suggesting that the more practiced task
leads to stronger brain connections.

D69
REFERENTIAL CONTEXT PROCESSING DEFICITS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: EVIDENCE FROM ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY Megan Boudewyn1,
Debra Long1, Matthew Traxler1, Tyler Lesh1, George R. Mangun1, Cameron Carter1,
Tamara Swaab1; 1University of California, Davis — In order to establish refer-

ence during comprehension, a referential expression must be connected to
its antecedent in discourse. In recent work with healthy adults, we have
shown that referential processing is significantly influenced by individual
differences in verbal skill and by attentional engagement to the context in
which the antecedent to a referential expression was introduced. In the current study, we investigated whether context-maintenance deficits in schizophrenia would lead to impaired recognition of referential ambiguity. We
tested 20 individuals with schizophrenia and 19 demographically-matched
controls. EEG was recorded while participants listened to stories, which
introduced antecedents that were either more or less difficult to represent
as separate entities (two oaks, vs. one oak and one elm). This rendered a referential expression in the final sentence (oak) ambiguous or unambiguous.
ERPs to this expression revealed that controls, but not patients, were sensitive to referential ambiguity. Further, alpha oscillations in the third sen-

Poster Session D
tence (which contained the antecedents) predicted the size of the ERP effect
in controls, but not in patients: control participants who had higher alpha
oscillations when they heard the antecedents in the ambiguous condition
(e.g., two oaks) relative to the unambiguous condition (e.g., an oak and
an elm) showed decreased sensitivity to referential ambiguity in sentence
four. These results indicate that, although context-maintenance in control
participants may be sensitive to fluctuations in attentional engagement,
individuals with schizophrenia may have a more pervasive deficit in the
ability to represent and maintain language context over time.

D70
CORTICAL ENCODING AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL TRACKING OF ENGLISH STRESS PATTERNS IN NATIVE AND NONNATIVE SPEAKERS Gavin Bidelman1, Weilun Chung1; 1University of Memphis
— Acoustically, English stress can be represented by variations in intensity and frequency between a stressed and an unstressed syllable. Previous behavioral and neuroimaging work has revealed that adult Mandarin-speaking English learners exploit frequency as a primary acoustic cue
when perceiving English stress, consistent with the importance of tone in
their native language. Here, we examined cross-language differences in
the ability to encode and track English stress patterns based on intensity
variations. Auditory event-related brain potentials (ERPs) were recorded in
English and Mandarin listeners in response to English pseudoword stimuli
with primary stress on the second syllable (i.e., “nocTICity”). Across syllables, we found stronger encoding of English stress in English relative to
Mandarin speakers in the latency of the N1-P2 complex (100-200ms). We
further evaluated correlations between the amplitude of ERPs and continuous changes in the intensity and frequency of speech stimuli to assess how
well each group’s brain responses tracked these salient acoustic features
of English stress. We found that English speakers’ neural activity tracked
intensity changes in speech better than Mandarin speakers; no differences
were found in the tracking of frequency cues. Our findings suggest more
robust and faithful processing of English stress patterns based on changes
in stimulus intensity in the early auditory cortical processing of native relative to nonnative English speakers. Coupled with previous studies, our
data demonstrate that linguistic experiences produce unique changes in
brain function to enhance the most relevant cues necessary for a listener’s
native language.

D71
OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS OF INTRA-SENTENTIAL CODESWITCHING Kaitlyn A. Litcofsky1, Janet G. van Hell1,2; 1Pennsylvania State University,
2

Radboud University Nijmegen — Codeswitching is a natural phenomenon of
bilingual speech in which bilinguals switch between their two languages,
such as “I ate huevos para el desayuno [eggs for breakfast]”. Previous ERP
research on intra-sentential codeswitching has found that codeswitches
incur a processing cost in terms of an N400 and a late positive component
(LPC), but these studies have not systematically studied the effect of language switching direction (switching from the first to the second language,
or vice versa), even though studies on isolated word switching have shown
modulatory effects of switching direction. Moreover, this research has only
focused on traditional evoked response (component) analyses. The present study examined both components and event-related changes in EEG
power during intra-sentential codeswitching. Oscillatory dynamics, which
reflect local and long-range network synchrony, have begun to be studied in language processing, but not in codeswitching in bilinguals. In our
study, highly proficient Spanish-English bilinguals read sentences that
contained intra-sentential codeswitches in both language switching directions while ERPs were recorded. Component analysis showed that switches
elicited only an increased LPC, and only when switching into the weaker
language but not when switching into the dominant language, suggesting
that codeswitches require sentence-level restructuring related to activation
of the weaker language. Time-frequency analyses focused on theta and
gamma band frequency ranges, which tend to indicate lexico-semantic
and sentence level unification processing, respectively, to find convergent
evidence between the ERP analysis methods. Results will be discussed in
terms of the neurocognitive understanding of codeswitching and interaction of languages in bilinguals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

133

Poster Session D

D72
ASYMMETRICAL MISMATCH NEGATIVITY EFFECTS IN MANDARIN
TONES 2 AND 3 Stephen Politzer-Ahles1; 1New York University Abu Dhabi —

Phonological asymmetries are reflected in electrophysiological responses:
for example, in English, /n/ is pronounced [m] in certain contexts (e.g.,
“rai[m]bow”), and a passive oddball paradigm elicits greater mismatch
negativity (MMN) for rare [n] tokens mixed with frequent [m] tokens than
for rare [m] tokens mixed with frequent [n] tokens. In other words, asymmetrical alternations may correlate with neurophysiological components.
Such asymmetries have not been studied in non-Indo-European languages
or in suprasegmental contrasts, which might not be represented in the same
way as segments. The present study investigated the neural representation
of a phonological asymmetry in Mandarin contour tones. Two tones, T2
and T3, are involved in a phonological alternation: in certain contexts, T3 is
pronounced as T2. EEG was recorded during a passive oddball paradigm
while participants heard blocks in which T3 (on a carrier syllable) was a frequent standard (85% of trials) and T2 an infrequent deviant (15% of trials),
or vice versa. ERPs for standard tokens were subtracted from ERPs for the
same token as a deviant, controlling for low-level acoustic differences and
yielding MMN waves. T2 deviants in T3 contexts elicited smaller MMNs
than T3 deviants in T2 contexts. The results suggest that T2 and T3 have
different featural representations in the mental lexicon. Abstract phonological knowledge that T2 is a possible realization of T3 mitigates the clash of
features between T2 deviants and T3 standards, whereas the reverse is not
the case (as T3 is not a possible realization of T2).

D73
AN EVENT-RELATED BRAIN POTENTIAL INVESTIGATION OF
MULTI-LEVEL PROBABILISTIC EXPECTATIONS IN SENTENCE
COMPREHENSION Edward W. Wlotko1, Margarita Zeitlin1, Gina R. Kuperberg1,2; 1Tufts University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — Prediction during

language comprehension occurs in a probabilistic manner at multiple levels
of representation. Here we used event-related brain potentials (ERPs) to
investigate how these multi-level predictions influence neural processing
of incoming words in context. Sentence contexts conveying events or states
were strongly or weakly lexically constraining, and were completed with
either the most expected word, an unexpected but plausible word, or a
word that violated the coarse semantic constraints of the context, creating
an impossible meaning representation. ERPs were recorded while participants read sentences word-by-word in a delayed acceptability judgment
task. The N400 was larger to impossible words (that mismatched coursegrained semantic constraints) than to plausible but unexpected words (that
mismatched finer-grained semantic constraints). The N400 to both types of
semantically unexpected words was, however, insensitive to lexical predictability, underlining the fact that it is primarily a reflection of semantic — as opposed to lexical — constraints. Plausible but unexpected words
that violated strong lexical constraint also elicited a late frontal positivity
effect. This is consistent with the idea that the late frontal positivity reflects
a violation of a high-certainty specific semantic-wordform prediction (lexical prediction) within a coherent meaning representation. In contrast, when
these same words created impossible meanings in their contexts, we did
not observe any late positivity effect in either strongly or weakly constraining contexts, perhaps because, unlike in previous studies, the contexts did
not constrain strongly for a single, specific semantic-syntactic structure.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
D74
AGE ESTIMATION BASED ON FACIAL IMAGES OF OTHERS: THE
EFFECT OF THE ACCUMULATED MEMORY OF A KNOWN FACE
ON THE OVERESTIMATION OF OTHERS Yuki Kitaoka1, Kenji Katahira1,
Noriko Nagata1; 1Graduate School of Science and Technology / Research Center
for Kansei Value Creation, Kwansei Gakuin University — This study aimed to
investigate an age estimation of others based on facial images. In our previous study, we conducted experiments in which participants estimated
the ages of those in facial images presented to them that were younger or

134

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
older than the participants and found that people tend to overestimate
others’ ages. We hypothesized that accumulated memory of one’s own
face is a possible cause of this tendency. This time, we examined whether
the memory of others also influences age estimation. In four experiments,
the participants estimated the ages of unknown others presented in facial
images (comparison stimuli) as younger or older than standard stimuli. In
Experiments 1 and 2, two types of standard stimuli were presented: facial
images of well-known others (brothers or sisters) and unknown others,
respectively, with age information. Participants had different amounts of
accumulated memory regarding these two stimuli. In Experiment 3, only
age information was presented to examine the influence of age instruction,
and only the facial images of unknown others were presented in Experiment 4 (control). The participants overestimated the comparison stimuli by
3.62, 2.01, 3.46, and -0.41 years, respectively, in Experiments 1–4. The results
revealed that age information influenced the tendency to overestimate
(Experiment 3 versus 4), and that accumulated memory of others’ faces also
influenced this tendency (Experiment 1 versus 2). We concluded that two
factors influence this overestimation: accumulated memory of individual
others’ faces and an average face related to a certain age constructed based
on experience or memory.

D75
AGE RELATED DECREASE IN WHITE MATTER AND GRAY MATTER
VOLUMES RELATED TO FAMILY HISTORY OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE Prabhjyot Singh1, Ariana Stickel1, Kevin Kawa1, Adrienne Buller2, Lee
Ryan1; 1University of Arizona, 2McGill University, Montreal, Canada — Family
history of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Apolipoprotein E 4 status are
risk factors for developing AD. Although the relationships between ApoE
4 and brain volume have been well studied, there are fewer studies on
the role of family history of AD on the brain. The present study examines
this relationship in 81 cognitively normal late middle age and older adults
(49-89 years). Participants included 40 individuals with a first degree relative with AD (+FH) and 41 age, gender, education, and ApoE e4 matched
controls without a family history of AD (-FH). Voxel based morphometry
was used to analyze structural MRIs. Segmented gray and white matter
images were analyzed to determine regions in which +FH volumes were
significantly smaller than in -FH individuals, controlling for intracranial
volume and age. Significant gray matter regions included bilateral frontal,
temporal, occipital, cerebellar, and thalamic regions while significant white
matter regions included bilateral frontal, parietal, and cerebellar regions.
These results suggest that FH of AD does affect brain structure in older
adults with no signs of dementia.

D76
AUTOPHAGY ACTIVATORS RESCUE AND ALLEVIATE THE PATHOGENESIS OF A FTLD-TDP MODEL WITH TDP-43 PROTEINOPATHIES IFang Wang1,2, Kuen-Jer Tsai3, Che-Kun James Shen1,2; 1Academia
Sinica, 2National Defense Medical Center, 3National Cheng Kung University —
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) have been reported to share the same pathological linkage
to TDP-43 proteinopathies, which is the mis-metabolism of TDP-43 and
the formation of ubiquitin (+), TDP-43 (+) inclusions in the diseased neurons of 90% of ALS cases and 50% of frontotemporal lobar dementia cases
(FTLD-TDP). We have studied the neuronal functions and dysfunction
of TDP-43 with the use of conditional transgenic mouse model of FTLDTDP generated in our lab. The data showed that overexpression of TDP-43
caused FTLD-TDP in mice with cognition defect and learning/memory
impairment. This mouse model now has been used for the identification,
validation and screening of drugs/ chemicals for the treatment of TDP-43
proteinopathies. Autophagy activation is an effective route for therapy of
TDP-43 Tg mice with FTLD phenotypes. In particular, the elevation learning and memory capability and cognition upon rapamycin treatment indicates that the cells in the forebrain of the mice, still maintain an autophagy
system, albeit impaired, that is responsive to and reusable by pharmacological stimuli to restore neuronal activity underlie memory storage and
processing. The therapeutic effects of other autophagy activators indeed
support this conclusion. This study has set the basis for therapy of neurodegenerative diseases with TDP-43 proteinopathies by pharmacologically
targeting autophagy.

2015 Annual Meeting

D77
AGE EFFECTS ON ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FOR NOVEL OBJECT
PAIRINGS Anna-Lena Scheuplein1, Emma K. Bridger1, Roni Tibon2, Nurit
Gronau3, Daniel A. Levy2, Axel Mecklinger1; 1Saarland University, Saarbrücken,
Germany, 2The Interdisciplinary Center, Herzliya, Israel, 3The Open University of
Israel, Raanana, Israel — Normal aging is characterized by a greater memory

decline for recollection than for familiarity. Though associative memory is
generally supported by recollection, it has been suggested that familiarity
can also contribute to associative memory when different components of
an association can be unitized to one single configuration. In the current
event-related potential (ERP) study we explored whether older adults’
associative memory deficit can be reduced under conditions that facilitate
unitization at encoding. We used pairs of semantically unrelated objects
that were positioned, relative to each other, in either spatially implausible
or plausible locations (e.g. a drill oriented away from or towards a donut),
the latter of which was assumed to foster unitization at encoding. Consistent with our predictions, age-related memory impairments were attenuated for pairings which were subjectively experienced as spatially plausible
as compared to pairings experienced as spatially implausible. An early and
broadly distributed old/new effect (presumably reflecting unit familiarity)
was present for spatially plausible pairings in both age groups. Supporting
the view that recollection is attenuated in old age, a late parietal old/new
effect (the ERP correlate of recollection) was present for young but not for
old adults. These findings suggest that even though recollection is attenuated in older adults, they can still use knowledge about relative object spatial relations to form memory representations that ameliorate associative
retrieval.

D78
DIFFERENCES IN ENCODING NETWORKS RELATED TO RETRIEVAL
ACCURACY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN FOR SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CONTEXT INFORMATION Elizabeth Ankudowich1, David Maillet2,
Diana Kwon1, Stamatoula Pasvanis1, Maria Natasha Rajah1; 1McGill University, 2Harvard University — Age-related change in episodic memory is characterized by larger deficits in context or source memory relative to item
memory, which are thought to be due, in part, to age-related differences
in the ability to successfully encode contextual details of events. Previous
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies investigating age
differences for encoding events subsequently remembered vs. forgotten at
retrieval (subsequent memory effects) have shown activation in frontal and
parietal cortex in older vs. young adults associated with decreased performance. However, little is know about how successful encoding networks
relate to context memory performance at mid-life. The present study aimed
to investigate successful encoding activation related to context memory
performance across the lifespan. Using fMRI, we compared how encoding
activity for correct trials in young (20-35; n=36), middle-aged (40-58; n=30),
and older (60-76; n=31) adults related to retrieval accuracy in a subsequent
memory paradigm that tested for the spatial and temporal details of faces.
Behaviorally, a significant Task x Group interaction on retrieval accuracy
(p<.05) revealed that young adults outperformed middle-aged and older
adults on both tasks, whereas middle-aged adults performed no differently
from older adults on either task. We used multivariate behavioral partial
least squares (B-PLS) analysis to identify whole-brain patterns of successful encoding activity that correlated with subsequent behavior across age
groups. We found medial temporal areas in addition to frontal and parietal
areas where encoding activity differentially correlated with task accuracy
across groups, suggesting that age-related functional change in encoding
networks related to retrieval accuracy begins at midlife.

D79
EFFECTS OF DISTRACTION AND AGE ON SPACING BENEFIT Ashleigh MacLean1, Patricia Simone1, Matthew Bell1; 1Santa Clara University, 2Santa
Clara University, 3Santa Clara University — We evaluated the effect of events
that occurred in that time between study and retrieval, with the goal of
examining what factors are necessary or relevant to the spacing benefit.
Additionally, we were interested in potential age-related differences in the
effects of these factors. In the learning session, participants were presented
with English word pairs. There were 5 within-subject conditions, with 10

Poster Session D
word pairs in each: no cued retrieval, cued retrieval immediately after presentation, cued retrieval after 20 seconds of a blank screen following presentation, cued retrieval after 20 seconds of a comic following presentation,
or cued retrieval after approximately 20 seconds of interleaving presentations and retrievals following initial presentation. The learning session
was followed by the Reliable Digit Span task and finally a testing session
with cued retrievals for all word pairs. Younger adults experienced spacing benefit in all spaced conditions, performing best in the condition with
interleaving presentations and retrievals (mean proportion correct was
.720 compared to .539 and .502 for the comic and blank screen conditions
respectively). Older adults also experienced a spacing benefit in all three
spaced conditions, but with no significant difference between these experimental conditions: means were .440, .447 and .427 for interleaving presentations/retrievals, comic, and blank respectively. Differences in performance
between age groups may be explained by previously established differences in contextual encoding: compared to younger adults, older adults are
less able to incorporate new contextual cues, and the distraction created by
interleaving events could create additional contextual cues for the retrieval.

D80
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL NETWORK CHANGES IN
DEMENTIA: A COMBINED STUDY OF VBM AND RESTING-STATE
FMRI Hongjie Yan1, Keiichi Onoda1, Shuhei Yamaguchi1; 1Shimane University
Faculty of Medicine — Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by progressive cognitive impairment with metabolic decline and neuron loss in the
brain, and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has been considered to be a
prodromal stage of AD. In this study, we explored structural and functional changes during different stages of cognitive impairment by using
AD Neuroimaging Initiative database. We collected 73 subjects from the
database, which included 21 with early MCI, 16 with late MCI, and 15 with
AD. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and functional network analysis by
graph theory were performed to elucidate anatomical and functional alterations along dementia progression. The VBM analysis showed significant
differences in gray matter volumes of the inferior frontal gyrus, precuneus,
cingulate gyrus, angular gyrus, lingual gyrus, supramarginal gyrus, precentral gyrus, basal ganglia and thalamus among the groups. The progression of cognitive impairment was associated with reduction or increment of
gray matter volume in each region. The graph theory analysis revealed that
the AD group had increased clustering coefficients (network segregation),
flow coefficients (centrality), and decreased characteristic path (network
integration) of functional networks compared with other groups. Most
regions with morphometric changes showed decreased local path length
or betweenness in association with cognitive impairment, but some regions
had only functional network changes without volume changes. Our results
suggest that the changes of gray matter volume and graph properties of
functional brain network could be dissociable along with development of
cognitive impairment.

D81
PATTERN SEPARATION AND RELATIONAL BINDING ACROSS THE
LIFESPAN Kelsey M. Hassevoort1, Patrick D. Watson1, Sarah E. Zola1, Charles
H. Hillman1, Neal J. Cohen1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Behavioral pattern separation and relational binding are both sensitive measures
of hippocampal function (Bakker et al., 2008, Watson et al., 2013) and are
sensitive to changes in memory that occur both in healthy aging and mild
cognitive impairment (Stark et al., 2014, Monti et al., 2013). However, less
is known about these examples of hippocampal-dependent memory in
the developing brain. The current study assessed memory in preadolescent children (N = 59; mean age = 8.7 years) who underwent a structural
MRI scan and completed behavioral testing as part of a larger randomized
controlled trial. The current analyses represent baseline data. Participants
completed both the Behavioral Pattern Separation Task - Object Version
(BPS-O, Stark et al., 2014) and a memory reconstruction task. Whereas previous studies using the BPS-O have shown a decline in behavioral pattern
separation performance but no decline in recognition memory performance
with age, we found that children exhibited poorer recognition memory but
were not impaired on behavioral pattern separation performance compared to young adults. For memory reconstruction, memory errors for
spatial relations and memory errors for feature relations between highly
similar objects were differentially related to behavioral pattern separation
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

135

Poster Session D
and recognition memory performance on BPS-O. These results suggest that
both tasks may provide measures that are sensitive to changes in memory
during development and that are likely distinct from the BPS-O pattern
separation measure that is sensitive to changes in memory in healthy aging.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
D82
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR STRATEGICALLY
ORIENTING RETRIEVAL PROCESSES TOWARD THE AGE OF A
MEMORY Jeffrey Johnson1, Anna McGhee1; 1University of Missouri — For

over a century, memory researchers have extensively studied the differences between retrieving memories that were encoded in the remote past
as opposed to recently. This body of research has largely focused on the
changes that memory traces are subjected to over time, such as decay, retroactive interference, and consolidation. A relatively unexplored issue,
however, is that retrieval attempts and processes might be differentially
oriented in order to effectively retrieve remote versus recent memories.
The current study addressed this issue by having subjects (n = 22) retrieve
words that were encoded one week (remote) or 30 minutes earlier (recent).
To encourage the adoption of distinct retrieval orientations, the memory
test employed exclusion procedures in which the words from only one of
the encoding periods were targeted at a given time (in separate blocks).
Event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by correctly-rejected new items
during the test blocks revealed differences according to the targeted week,
such that ERPs over posterior scalp were more positive-going for the recent
compared to remote condition. Furthermore, using multiple methods,
these ERP effects were dissociated from differences in retrieval difficulty
across the two conditions. The findings thus provide novel evidence that
knowledge about the age of a memory leads to the adoption of different
orienting strategies in support of episodic retrieval.

D83
PROSPECTIVE REPRESENTATION OF NAVIGATIONAL GOALS IN
THE HUMAN MTL Thackery I. Brown1, Karen F. LaRocque1, Serra E. Favila1,2,
Valerie A. Carr1, Alan M. Gordon1, Ben Bowles1,3, Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford
University, 2New York University, 3University of California, Berkeley — The mental

representation of future states is a critical component of goal-directed
behavior. The hippocampus and neighboring medial temporal lobe (MTL)
cortices are believed to play a critical role in spatial navigation through representation of goal locations (McKenzie et al., 2013) and prospective location coding (Johnson and Redish, 2007) in rodents, and supporting goal-directed route planning in humans (Brown et al., 2014; Hartley et al., 2003).
Using high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (hr-fMRI),
we examined whether the human MTL supports goal-directed navigation
by representing future goal states during initial navigational planning. On
day 1, participants learned to navigate to hidden goal locations in a virtual
open-field environment. Each location was uniquely associated with a distinct pair of fractal images. On day 2, participants repeatedly navigated to
the goals during hr-fMRI scanning. Participants began each trial at a familiar location, after which the environment was hidden from view and participants were cued by of one of the fractals to plan navigation to its location. Participants subsequently navigated to this goal. Using multivoxel
pattern analyses (MVPA), initial results from eight healthy, right-handed
young adults demonstrated that hippocampal and parahippocampal cortical patterns contain information during initial planning that predicts the
goal location to which participants will subsequently navigate. Moreover,
when the classifier was more confident, classifier evidence for the goal was
correlated between these MTL regions. Collectively, these results suggest
that the human MTL prospectively represents future goals, contributing to
flexible planning of future navigation behavior.

D84
WHEN THE WHAT DETERMINES THE WHERE: A META-ANALYSIS
OF HIPPOCAMPAL DIFFERENTIATION OF STIMULUS CONTENT
DURING EPISODIC ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL Jonas Persson1,
Hedvig Söderlund1; 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden — From lesion studies
in rodents and imaging studies in humans it has become increasingly clear

136

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
that the hippocampus is functionally heterogeneous along its longitudinal
axis, with spatial tasks frequently engaging the posterior hippocampus.
The areas that are engaged during episodic memory are more distributed
along the hippocampal axis and may depend on the specific nature of the
stimuli. Here, we investigate the effect of stimulus content on the location of
hippocampal recruitment during episodic memory encoding and retrieval
of verbal and pictorial material with a meta-analysis approach, using activation likelihood estimation (ALE) and restricting the analysis to the hippocampus. Verbal material was associated with left-lateralized and anterior
activation, compared to pictorial material that recruited a more posterior
aspect of the hippocampus, primarily within the right hemisphere. This
effect held for encoding of both single items and item-item associations but
was less clear during retrieval. Furthermore, within pictorial stimuli, there
was a tendency for objects to activate the left anterior hippocampus with
faces and scenes being located more posteriorly and bilaterally. The findings lend further support to a functional subdivision of the hippocampus
along its longitudinal axis and indicate that the content of episodic memories is one factor that determines the location of hippocampal recruitment.

D85
LOCAL AND DISTRIBUTED EFFECTS OF TARGETED NONINVASIVE STIMULATION OF THE HIPPOCAMPAL SYSTEM ON RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORKS Jane Wang1, Joel Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — The hippocampus has a vital

role in declarative/relational memory due to its ability to bind together
elements of experience that are individually processed by distributed brain
regions. However, the causal nature of hippocampal dynamics within
whole-brain functional networks is largely unknown. We therefore modulated hippocampal network dynamics using multiple-day noninvasive
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) targeted to the posterior-medial hippocampal system, as defined via resting-state fMRI connectivity with left hippocampal body (N=16). Using a sham-controlled
within-subjects design, we found that stimulation increased connectivity
within hippocampal-cortical networks and was associated with selective
improvements in relational memory performance that far outlasted the
treatment period. We describe for the first time the effects of stimulation on
whole-brain network dynamics in relation to effects on hippocampus and
on memory. Using a novel whole-brain connectivity analysis to identify
regions that responded to stimulation with global increase in functional
connectivity, we identified the specific areas of the hippocampus that were
targeted in each subject, as well as other distributed cortical regions. Further analysis revealed that some of these regions, including the hippocampal target location, exhibited high functional connectivity to the cortical
stimulation site at baseline, the majority of which were highly connected
to the hippocampal target itself. Noninvasive stimulation can thus have
both local effects on targeted networks as well as more distributed influences. We postulate that multiple-day stimulation can create direct and second-order connectivity changes in resting-state dynamics, possibly mediated by the hippocampal network.

D86
USING TDCS/CTBS TO INVESTIGATE THE INVOLVEMENT OF
LEFT POSTERIOR PARIETAL COETEX IN EPISODIC MEMORY
RETRIEVAL Nai-Feng Chen1, Chien-Ming Lo1, Chi-Hung Juan1, Neil Muggleton1, Shih-kuen Cheng1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, National Central
University, Taiwan — Functional neuroimaging studies of episodic memory

retrieval have demonstrated the prominent contribution of the left posterior parietal cortex (LPPC), particularly the left angular gyrus (LAnG) to
the conscious recollection process. The present study aimed to investigate
whether the LPPC/LAnG is responsible for episodic retrieval by using
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and continuous theta burst
stimulation (cTBS). In the tDCS experiment, participants were divided into
two groups: Anode and Cathode group. During the three sessions, Anode
group received anodal tDCS over the left posterior parietal cortex (LPPC),
anodal tDCS over the right motor cortex (M1), and sham; Cathode group
received cathodal tDCS over LPPC, cathodal tDCS over M1, and sham. In
each session, participants performed a study-test source memory task and
on-line tDCS was delivered during the test phase. The results showed that
source accuracy was diminished following cathdal tDCS. In the cTBS experiment, we further examined the LAnG involvement in episodic retrieval.

2015 Annual Meeting
All participants encountered three stimulation sessions in separate days:
cTBS over LAnG, Sham, and control. A modified multi-contextual source
memory task was applied in each session, and an off-line cTBS was delivered five minutes before the test stage. No cTBS modulatory effect on source
accuracy was found. These findings provide some supportive evidence for
the causal involvement of LPPC in episodic retrieval process. However, the
null results of the cTBS experiment might due to the delicate nature of the
recollection network. More converging evidence is needed to establish the
functional role of LAnG in episodic retrieval.

D87
LOOKING AT NOTHING: HOW EYE MOVEMENTS RELATE TO EPISODIC RICHNESS DURING EVENT RECONSTRUCTION Michael
Armson1,2, Douglas A. McQuiggan2, Brian Levine1,2, Jennifer D. Ryan1,2; 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest,
Toronto, ON, Canada — Previous research has shown that eye movements

may serve to rehearse information during encoding and maintenance stages
of memory. The current study addressed the role of eye movements during
memory retrieval. Twenty healthy participants verbally recalled autobiographical memories while their eye movements were monitored as they
viewed a blank screen. There were two viewing conditions: (1) free viewing: participants were able to look anywhere on the screen, and (2) fixed
viewing: participants had to maintain fixation on a central cross throughout
recall. There were also two memory conditions: (1) specific events: unique
episodes specific in time and place, and (2) repeated events: frequent experiences remembered in a more generic manner. Participants’ recollections
were scored for details according to Levine et al.’s (2002) Autobiographical
Interview protocol. More fixations were generated during free than fixed
viewing (F(1, 19) = 22.210, p = .000) with longer saccade length (F(1, 19)
= 49.044, p = .000). Participants made more fixations and provided more
internal (episodic) details while recalling specific than repeated events (fixations: F(1, 19) = 55.612, p = .000; internal details: F(1, 19) = 34.124, p = .000).
There was a positive correlation between number of fixations and number
of internal details during free viewing (r(19) = .578, p = .008). These findings
suggest that specific events involve richer re-experiencing than repeated
events and that the degree of episodic richness is related to the number of
eye movements. Eye movements may facilitate event reconstruction or may
be a by-product of such detail generation.

D88
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF RECOLLECTION AND
CORTICAL REINSTATEMENT Rachael L. Elward1, Leslie J. Lewis1, Preston
P. Thakral1, Michael D. Rugg1; 1Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at
Dallas — Previous research has shown that the neural processes engaged

during encoding are reinstated during retrieval. In contrast, generic recollection effects are associated with successful recollection regardless of
the encoding context. The relationship between the generic recollection-related cortical activity and cortical reinstatement is not well understood.
According to one proposal, however, pattern completion processes in the
hippocampus provide access to the content of the stored memory representation, and further recollection-related processes act on this information
post-retrieval. We contrasted the time-courses of content-sensitive ERP recollection effects with that of modality-independent effects (i.e. the parietal
recollection effect, and the late right frontal effect). Participants studied pictures of objects along with the objects’ visual or auditory names. At test,
they first discriminated between studied and unstudied pictures and, for
each picture judged studied, then judged whether it had been paired with
a visual or auditory name, using a two-point confidence scale. The electrophysiological data at test contrasting source correct and source incorrect
judgments showed the typical pattern of generic ERP recollection effects.
In addition, the results indicated that modality-specific recollection effects
demonstrated a similar time-course to the generic effects, onsetting around
400ms post-stimulus and lasting for the remainder of the recording epoch.
These findings suggest that, as indexed by scalp electrophysiological activity, the neural correlates of content-dependent reinstatement and generic
recollection occur in parallel.

Poster Session D

D89
RECALL-TO-REJECT: THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF FALSE
MEMORY SUPPRESSION USING TRUE RECOLLECTION Caitlin
Bowman1, Nancy A. Dennis1; 1The Pennsylvania State University — Memories
based on recollection involve the vivid reinstatement of a previous episode, including retrieval of specific contextual details of an item’s previous occurrence. While recollection during recognition tasks has typically
been associated with hits, previous evidence also suggests that recollection
may help correction rejections by providing details of target items that are
inconsistent with lures, a strategy known as recall-to-reject. The present
study sought to evaluate both the common and distinct neural mechanisms
supporting true recollection and recall-to-reject. Using a novel adaption of
the Remember-Know-New paradigm, we asked participants to discriminate not only between recollection and familiarity for items they perceived
as old, but also between recollection rejection and lack of familiarity for
items they perceived as new. Despite the theoretical overlap between these
memory responses, cortical overlap was limited to late visual and parietal
cortices. Direct comparisons between recall-to-reject and true recollection
revealed increased activity in left-lateralized prefrontal regions, consistent
with the notion that using recollected details to reject as opposed to accept
an item requires increased retrieval monitoring. In contrast, true recollection compared to recall-to-reject revealed activity in the typical recollection
network, including left posterior MTL, medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus,
and early visual cortex. Taken together, evidence suggests that recall to
reject does not recruit the recollection network to the same extent as true
recollection, but is instead associated primarily with monitoring processes.

D90
STRESS REACTIVITY ENHANCES MEMORY FOR EMOTIONAL
CONTENT AT THE COST OF NEUTRAL INFORMATION Tony Cunningham1, Stephen Mattingly1, Jessica Payne1; 1University of Notre Dame — Emotional experiences create durable memory traces in the brain and tend to be
exceptionally well remembered during times of stress. Stress, which leads
to the release of the stress hormone cortisol, has been linked to enhanced
memory consolidation for emotional content, but impaired consolidation
for neutral content. Here, participants encoded scenes consisting of negative or neutral objects on neutral backgrounds, followed by a psychosocial stress task or a control condition. The following day, recognition
memory was tested for objects and backgrounds separately. This allowed
us to explore how stress exposure would affect the selective consolidation
of emotional content. Mixed ANOVA analysis revealed a three-way interaction among Condition (stress/control), Scene Component (object/background), and Valence (negative/neutral) [F(1, 41)=4.6, p=0.037], which was
driven by an increase in memory for negative objects but also a suppression
of memory for associated neutral backgrounds after stress. Thus, there was
a significantly larger emotional memory tradeoff effect in the stress group
than in the control group [t(41)=2.0, p=0.05]. Based on cortisol reactivity to
the stressor, we next divided participants into responders vs. nonresponders. While the aforementioned three-way interaction was retained in the
stress responder group [F(1,32)=6.9, p=0.01], nonresponders performed
identically to the control group, suggesting that a stress response is necessary to produce these memory effects. We suggest that HPA axis activation may help “tag” emotional objects as important to remember, enabling
processes active during consolidation to selectively enhance emotional
memory while concurrently suppressing neutral information.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
D91
FORGETTING IN THE HEALTHY BRAIN: FALSE RECOGNITION IS
PRESENT BUT LIMITED IN YOUNG ADULTS UNDER HIGH VISUAL
INTERFERENCE Lok-Kin Yeung1, Hannah Bild-Enkin1, Anna Keshabyan1,
Morgan Barense1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute, Toronto
ON — In our previous work (Yeung et al., 2013), we found that older adults

at-risk for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) exhibited false recognition
under high feature-level interference conditions. In the current study, we
investigated whether cognitively-intact younger adults would also exhibit
the same impairment as feature-level interference was increased beyond

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

137

Poster Session D
those of our original study. In a continuous viewing paradigm, participants
viewed high- and low-interference novel stimuli, as well as familiar stimuli. Critically, we evaluated how implicit (eyetracking-based) and explicit
measures of novelty changed as the number of stimuli (and thus the level
of interference) increased. On both sets of measures, participants were
initially able to identify high-interference stimuli as novel, but exhibited
increased false recognition as interference increased. Regardless of the level
of interference however, younger adults were still able to recognize some of
the high-interference stimuli as novel, unlike the catastrophic interference
experienced by memory-impaired older adults in our previous study. In
contrast, novelty detection was unimpaired for familiar or low-interference
novel items, regardless of how many stimuli were shown. These results
demonstrate that while younger adults are still vulnerable to feature-level
interference, they benefit from a protective mechanism that shields them
from catastrophic interference, which is lost in older adults at-risk for MCI.

D92
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIOURAL CHARACTERISTICS OF VIRTUAL NAVIGATION TASK PERFORMANCE Erin L Zelinski1,
Mashal Fida1, Bailee Stasiuk1, Scott Oberg1, Robert J Sutherland1; 1Canadian
Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience, University of Lethbridge — Examination

of the neurological underpinnings of spatial abilities often requires human
subjects to be stationary. Thus, virtual reality is a commonly used tool for
elucidating how we process information about the world around us. We
hypothesized that differences in navigational skill would impact the strategy implemented by subjects, whether they would notice changes to the
environment, and the electrophysiological responses to the presentation of
manipulated vs. non-manipulated and remembered, non-remembered, and
novel scenes during performance of a virtual navigation task. Object-location memory was assessed within a large-scale, virtual environment whilst
recording dense array EEG. Subjects were restricted to a central circular
area by a fence, but the world beyond (e.g., mountains, seascape, forest)
remained visible. In addition to these distal cues, various naturalistic
objects (e.g., boulders, trees) were present within the navigable portion of
the environment to provide proximal cues. During the exploration phase of
the task, subjects moved through the environment until all object-location
pairs were encountered. The second phase of the task was a targeted search
wherein subjects were shown pictures of objects with background images
that were either congruent with the original object-location pair or incongruent. Subjects began each trial at a central start location and rotated until
their perceived optimal direction to travel straight to their current target.
The final phase of the task required subjects to place objects in their original
locations over a topographical representation of the environment. Several
factors influenced performance including sex, experience playing video
games, and attended stimuli during task performance.

D94
SEX DIFFERENCES IN MUSIC: A FEMALE ADVANTAGE AT RECOGNIZING MELODIES Scott A. Miles1, Robbin A. Miranda1, Natasha C. Janfaza1, Michael T. Ullman1; 1Georgetown University — Sex differences have been

reported in various aspects of cognition. For example, females may have
an advantage at verbal abilities, and males at spatial processing. There has
been little research, however, on sex differences in music cognition. One
aspect of music in which such differences might be expected is in the storage and retrieval of melodies. A growing body of evidence suggests that
aspects of music and language cognition depend on overlapping neural
substrates. Thus the apparent female verbal advantage may translate to a
female advantage at aspects of music. Some evidence suggests, moreover,
that the verbal advantage may hold particularly for words, in part because
words are stored in the declarative memory brain system, which has shown
female advantages (Ullman, Miranda and Travers, 2008). Additional evidence suggests that melodies may also be stored in this system (Miranda
and Ullman, 2007), perhaps because it is specialized for learning arbitrary
bits of information and binding them together—which may be necessary
not only for words (phonemes bound together) but also for melodies (notes
bound together). Thus we hypothesized that females might show an advantage in the storage and retrieval of melodies. We administered a melody
recognition task to test this hypothesis. We found that females were both
more accurate and faster than males at recognizing familiar melodies, and

138

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
that this held for both musicians and non-musicians. No sex differences
were found in a tone-recognition control task. The results suggest the existence of sex differences in music that parallel those in language.

D95
EFFECT OF 2-[(6-NITRO-2-BENZOTHIAZOLYL)AMINO]-2-OXOETHYL 4-[2-(N,N-DIMETHYLAMINO)ETHYL]PIPERAZINE-1-CARBODITHIOATE ON LEARNING AND MEMORY PARAMETERS OF
RATS IN EXPERIMENTAL ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE MODEL Nazlı
Turan1, Taliha Harika Aydın1, Ümide Demir Özkay1, Özgür Devrim Can1, Yusuf
Özkay2; 1Anadolu University, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2Anadolu University, Faculty
of Pharmacy — 2-[(6-Nitro-2-benzothiazolyl)amino]-2-oxoethyl4-[2-(N,N-di-

methylamino)ethyl]piperazine-1-carbodithioate (2PCT) is a compound
having remarkable anticholinesterase inhibitory enzyme activity. In this
study, based on this in vitro activity, we planned to investigate potential
therapeutic effect of this drug on cognitive parameters of rats in streptozotocin-induced Alzheimer’s disease model (SADM). Morris water maze
test (MWMt) and active avoidance tests (AAt) were performed in order to
examine the effect of 2PCT (10,20 mg/kg) on learning and memory parameters of rats. Effects of test compound on spontaneous locomotor activities of
rats were examined with the activity cage tests. In MWMt there was a significant difference between the initial acquisition latency and first retention
latency values of i.c.v. citrate buffer-injected control group, displaying the
ability of learning and memory behaviors of the control animals. However,
difference between these parameters was not significant in the i.c.v. STZ-injected groups indicating the occurrence of Alzheimer’s disease model in
these groups, as expected. Similar results were observed for latency times
and numbers of avoidances parameters in AAt. 2PCT was significantly
declined the 2nd retention latency times of animals in the MWMt. Further,
latency times of animals were significantly decreased and avoidance numbers of animals were significantly increased with the administration of this
compound in the AAt. Donepezil (3 mg/kg), reference drug, improved
the measured learning parameters in both of the tests. The test compound
was not significantly changed the spontaneous locomotor activities of rats.
Results of this study revealed that, 2PCT repaired the parameters related to
the learning and memory deficits in SADM.

D96
THE EFFECT OF MIANSERIN TREATMENT ON MORRIS WATER
MAZE PERFORMANCE OF STREPTOZOTOCIN INDUCED DIABETIC RATS Feyza Alyu1, Umut İrfan ÜÇEL1, Özgür Devrim Can1, Ümide Demir
Özkay1; 1Anadolu University Faculty of Pharmacy — Recent studies have indi-

cated that Diabetes mellitus (DM) induces notable detrimental effect on
central nervous system. As well as psychiatric disorders, diabetic patients
have been reported to suffer from impaired cognitive performance. However, there are only limited number of nootropic drugs and none of them
is favorable for diabetes-induced cognitive disorders. Therefore, new
therapeutic approaches are needed and psychotropic drugs with treating potential of not only hyperglycemia but also emotional and cognitive
disorders may provide additional advantage by avoiding polypharmacy.
Mianserin, an atypical antidepressant drug, has been shown to reduce
hyperglycemia in STZ-diabetic rats. Further, this drug has been restored
depression and anxiety levels of diabetic animals. Therefore, in this study,
we planned to examine potential therapeutic effect of mianserin (30, 45
mg/kg) on diabetes-related cognitive impairments. Diabetes was induced
by a single intravenous injection of streptozotocin (45mg/kg). Cognitive
performance of the animals were evaluated in Morris water-maze test. In
water-maze, day 4 escape latency times was taken as an index of acquisition, whereas mean time spent in target quadrant on day 5 was taken
as an index of retrieval (memory). Diabetic rats showed an impairment of
acquisition as well as retention on water maze task in comparison to the
healthy animals. On the other hand, mianserin-treated animals located the
hidden platform faster and stayed longer in the target quadrant time than
the controls. These results suggest that, in diabetic animal impaired spatial learning and memory capacity was significantly improved following
mianserin treatment.

2015 Annual Meeting

D97
SENSE OF AGENCY IN SELF-DIRECTED LEARNING RECRUITS
HIPPOCAMPUS FOR ENHANCED MEMORY. SukHee Yun1, Yeon Soon
Shin2, Na-Young Shin3, Seung-Koo Lee3, Sanghoon Han1; 1Yonsei University,
Seoul, Korea, 2Princeton University, Princeton, USA, 3Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea — Although recent studies have shown benefits of
self-directed learning on subsequent long-term memory, exploration of the
benefits based only on Sense of Agency (SOA) among various factors is
inadequate since the paradigms lack considering of the participants’ spontaneous on-line preference and conative learning methods. Our study used
a card-flipping task in encoding phase to distinguish the volitional effects
caused by SOA, allowing participants to select and carry out their preferred
method of learning (Self-Directed Learning (SDL) or Passive Learning (PL))
in real-time. Cross-interaction of the magnitude and direction of the volitional effect depending on the presence of the motor response was identified. In fMRI analyses, levels of subsequent memory strengths parametrically modulated activities of right hippocampus and parahippocampal
regions when SDL is compared to motor-associated PL. Additionally, the
mentioned effect was more stronger for individuals preferring SDL over PL,
and these participants showed better memory and shorter response times
in SDL. Also, preference on SDL over PL was correlated with higher level of
connectivities within important networks of resting state; hippocampus to
right anterior cingulum, right mid frontal, bilateral superior frontal region,
left Insula and bilateral mid temporal region. The current findings on volitional benefits with equivalent levels of access to target information across
learning methods suggest that the benefits cannot be solely attributed to the
fact SDL allows ease of encoding by reducing the need of cognitive control.

D98
HIPPOCAMPAL INVOLVEMENT IN THE PERCEPTUAL JUDGEMENT
OF ESCHER-LIKE IMPOSSIBLE SCENES. Danielle M Douglas1, Sathesan Thavabalasingam1, Zahraa Chorghay1, Andy C H Lee1,2; 1University of Toronto,
2
Rotman Research Institute — Although a large body of work has established

that the hippocampus is critical for spatial cognition, it remains contentious
whether this role can be extended beyond memory to perception. To date,
studies directly implicating the hippocampus in scene perception are confounded by significant working memory demands, such as the comparison
of multiple, simultaneously presented stimuli, or the comparison of stimuli over a short delay. Thus, the possibility remains that working memory
requirements, rather than perceptual manipulations, drive hippocampal
involvement in scene processing. In order to address this, hippocampal
activity in sixteen young, neurologically healthy participants was investigated using functional magnetic resonance imaging during a scene perception task with minimal working memory demands. In this task, the subjects
made coherency judgments of 56 trial-unique scenes presented in isolation,
each containing no moveable objects. Crucially, half of these images were
manipulated such that the structural coherency of the scene was violated,
while the individual components of the scene remained intact. Moreover,
a surprise recognition memory task was performed following scanning in
order to investigate the contribution of long-term encoding to hippocampal
activity. We found that activation in the hippocampus was greater for structurally incoherent compared to structurally coherent scenes, and importantly, this activity could not be explained by long-term memory encoding
of the scenes. Our findings indicate that hippocampal involvement can be
observed during a scene perception task with minimal working memory
demands, irrespective of long-term memory processing, and provide further support for a role for the hippocampus in spatial perception.

D99
DIFFERENCES IN WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY OF LEARNERS AND
NON-LEARNERS AFTER MODERATE AND SEVERE TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURY Kathy S. Chiou1, Nancy D. Chiaravalloti1,2, Helen M. Genova1,2;
1
Kessler Foundation, 2Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School — Deficits in learning and memory are common after traumatic brain injury (TBI); however,
the underlying mechanism of these impairments remains unclear. Previous research suggests that learning abilities after TBI may be moderated
by executive processes. It is well-established that deficits in executive functioning are associated with compromised white matter integrity (WMI) of

Poster Session D
the frontal lobes after TBI. Thus, it is suspected that frontal WMI related to
disordered executive processes could also affect the domain of learning.
This study examined the impact of decreased WMI, as measured with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), on learning abilities in persons with moderate
and severe TBI. We hypothesized that there would be a significant difference in frontal WMI between TBI participants with intact versus impaired
learning abilities. 16 adults with moderate/severe TBI were divided into 2
groups [learners (n=7) and non-learners (n=9)] based on achievement of 2
perfect repetitions of a 10-word list presented over a maximum of 15 trials.
Participants completed a DTI scan and neuropsychological tests. Results
indicate that learners had greater WMI in the right frontal cortex than the
non-learner group. Fractional anisotropy (FA) values were extracted from
this region. Higher FA values were correlated with better performance on
a working memory task in the learner group, but not in the non-learner
group. In contrast, lower FA values were associated with worse performance on visual processing speed tasks in the non-learner group, but
not the learner group. These findings have implications for rehabilitative
approaches to improve learning and memory after TBI.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming
D101
A CRITICAL ROLE OF THE HUMAN HIPPOCAMPUS IN IMPLICIT
MEMORY PROCESSING Rick James Addante1; 1University of Texas at
Dallas, School of Behavioral & Brain Sciences — The hippocampus has traditionally been thought to be critical for conscious explicit memory but not
necessary for implicit memory processing that is unavailable to conscious
recollection. In a recent study of a group of mild amnesia patients with
evidence of MTL damage limited to the hippocampus, and two groups
of healthy controls subjects, subjects were tested on a direct test of item
recognition confidence, while indirect measures of memory were acquired
with electroencephalogram (EEG). Intact physiological measures of explicit
memory (mid-frontal old-new effect, FN400) were evident in both patients
and controls from 400-600ms. The current investigation re-analyzed this
data to study event-related potentials (ERPs) of implicit memory, using a
procedure that eliminated declarative memory differences. Prior findings
from this technique were first replicated in the two independent control
groups, which exhibited reliable implicit memory effects in posterior scalp
regions from 400-600 msec. However, patients were found to be dramatically impaired relative to control subjects, as quantified by a reliable condition x group interaction. Several control analysis were conducted to
consider alternative factors that could account for the results, including
outliers, sample size, age, or contamination by explicit memory, and each of
these were systematically ruled out. Results suggest that the hippocampus
plays a fundamental role in aspects of memory processing that is beyond
conscious awareness. The current findings therefore indicate that both
memory systems of implicit and explicit memory may rely upon the same
neural structures – but function in different physiological ways.

D102
VALUE ASSOCIATIONS INHERENTLY TRANSFERRED TO NOVEL
ITEMS Hillary Wehe1, Shelly Staley1; 1Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado — Wimmer and Shohamy (2012) demonstrated that reward is
transferred through hippocampal memory systems. They first had subjects view pairs of objects, and then paired half the objects with a potential
reward. On a subsequent two alternative forced choice test subjects showed
a decision bias for objects that had been paired during the first part with
later-to-be-rewarded objects, even though the object was never directly
paired with reward itself. This transfer of value happens without recollection of the original reward conditioning. Other research has shown that
inherent associations exist between stimuli that share individual features.
Subjects report higher familiarity for novel test items with orthographic
features that are similar to items previously studied (Cleary, 2004). We
examined whether decision biases would be present for new items that
share features with studied items paired with reward, but which were not
directly paired with reward or studied items. Subjects (n = 240) studied
words; half of which were paired with a reward outcome and the other
were not. At test subjects completed a forced-choice decision task between
pairs of novel non-word stimuli one of which was orthographically similar
to a rewarded studied word. Subjects showed a significant bias to choose
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

139

Poster Session D
the word that was similar to the rewarded study word (t =15.7, p < .001).
The bias remained after decreasing immediate study and response time for
the task (n= 25, t =2.9, p < .01).

METHODS: Neuroimaging
D103
USING A MULTI-TASK BRAIN IMAGING BATTERY TO RELATE
SPEECH PRODUCTION TO PHONOLOGICAL WORKING MEMORY,
EMOTION AND PROSODY Kevin Sitek1,2, Gregory Ciccarelli2,3, Carlo de los
Angeles2, Thomas Quatieri3, Satrajit Ghosh1,2; 1Harvard Medical School, 2MIT,
3
MIT Lincoln Laboratory — Producing meaningful speech involves the coordi-

nation of numerous motor, perceptual, and cognitive processing systems.
In this study, we investigated the relation between emotion processing,
pitch modulation, and phonological working memory in the context of
overt verbal output. Participants performed a variety of tasks including
overt sentence reading, nonword repetition, and rate and pitch modulation during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). To maximize
the number of trials and temporal and spatial SNR, while minimizing the
effects of scanner noise, we used state-of-the-art simultaneous multislice
sequences with rapid sparse sampling. We found that producing emotional
sentences involved a combination of limbic network structure also activated our non-speech visual emotional face task, including amygdala, prefrontal cortex, and cingulate cortex. Additionally, auditory and motor areas
activated during emotional sentence production are similar to emotionally
neutral content spoken with specified pitches (high, low, and normal), suggesting engagement of a prosodic network that is also active during emotional speech. Orbitofrontal cortex was more active in emotional vs. neutral
sentence production, with modulatory effects of emotion observed in auditory cortex. The rapid acquisition paradigm also enabled us to confirm that
auditory processing regions increased activation when faced with heavier
phonological loads in a nonword repetition task, while ventral somatosensory cortex and supramarginal gyrus were activated during rapid production of speech sounds. Using task-optimized rapid acquisition parameters,
we can collect a large battery of tasks that elucidate the complex cortical
and subcortical mechanisms involved in modulation of speech production.

D104
CD4 COUNTS PREDICT WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN PEOPLE
LIVING WITH HIV: A META-ANALYSIS BY THE ENIGMA HIV WORKING GROUP Talia M. Nir1, Jean-Paul Fouche2, Victor G. Valcour3, Cecilia M.
Shikuma4, Kalpana Kallianpur4, Jintanat Ananworanich5, Jaroslaw Harezlak6,
Giovanni Schifitto7, Neda Jahanshad1, Bradford A. Navia8, Dan J. Stein2, Ronald
A. Cohen9,10; 1Imaging Genetics Center, Keck USC School of Medicine, 2Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, University of Cape Town, South Africa,
3
UCSF, Neurology, 4Office of Public Health Studies, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
John A. Burns School of Medicine, 5SEARCH, The Thai Red Cross AIDS Research
Center, Bangkok, Thailand, 6Indiana University Fairbanks School of Public Health,
Indianapolis, 7Department of Neurology, University of Rochester, 8Department
of Public Health, Infection Unit, Tufts University School of Medicine, 9Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, the Warren Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, 10Centers for Behavioral and Preventive Medicine, The Miriam
Hospital — Antiretroviral therapy has greatly improved the quality of life
for many people living with HIV, but chronic infection is associated with
neurological deficits, brain atrophy, and progressive decline in the brain’s
white matter pathways. By pooling data from neuroimaging studies of HIV
worldwide, we boosted our statistical power to detect associations between
immunological markers of disease and brain injury. In a diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) study for the ENIGMA HIV consortium (http://enigma.ini.
usc.edu/ongoing/enigma-HIV-working-group/), we related CD4+ cell
count to fractional anisotropy (FA), a measure of brain white matter integrity, in 281 HIV+ patients scanned in Thailand, South Africa, and across the
United States (6 sites). We used the ENIGMA DTI analysis protocols for
robust multi-site analyses. For each site, we ran linear regressions, adjusting for age and sex, to test associations between CD4 counts and corpus callosum FA (genu, body and splenium). No single cohort yielded significant

140

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
evidence of association, but an inverse variance-weighted meta-analysis
found consistent positive associations between FA in the corpus callosum
genu and CD4 counts (p=0.03). Pooling brain scans from HIV+ individuals worldwide may implicate factors that predict white matter integrity,
revealing effects that no single cohort can identify.

D105
UNCOVERING SEX ESSENTIALISM IN NEUROIMAGING
RESEARCH ON HUMAN SEX/GENDER DIFFERENCES Vanessa
Bentley1; 1University of Cincinnati — Sex essentialism, sometimes termed biological essentialism, is the view that the two sexes are essentially distinct;
males and females have different biological essences that are a result of
their sex. Sex essentialism as an assumption imposes methodological and
theoretical limitations. The assumption is socially and ethically problematic
because it naturalizes sex/gender differences and can be used to justify the
oppression of women. I investigate two case studies in the neuroimaging
of sex/gender differences and find that sex essentialism is pervasive. The
first case study is on structural differences in the corpus callosum, comprising 45 articles. The second is on functional activation differences in the
mental rotation task, comprising 14 articles. I find that: 1) researchers fail
to distinguish sex and gender, giving the impression that all differences are
due to sex factors (biology, hormones, genetics, “nature”); 2) researchers
fail to consider evidence that contradicts their sex/gender-based theory;
3) researchers continue to hunt for sex/gender differences even though
there are no consistent findings of differences across studies; 4) researchers
assume their results generalize across time and cultures; and 5) researchers assume that experience doesn’t affect brain structure and function.
Throughout, it is unclear if researchers explicitly avow sex essentialism or
if they are ignorant of the assumption. I suggest a new framework for cognitive neuroscience that is better founded epistemically and is more socially
and morally responsible. This framework connects feminist standpoint
empiricism (Intemann 2010) to the practice of cognitive neuroimaging.

D106
LATERALIZATION OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN THE ASYMMETRIC
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE CONNECTOME Adam F Mezher1, Madelaine
Daianu1, Neda Jahanshad1, Talia M Nir1, Clifford R Jack, Jr.2, Michael W Weiner3,
Matthew Bernstein2, Paul M Thompson1; 1University of Southern California,
2
Mayo Clinic, 3University of California, San Francisco — Diffusion-weighted

imaging (DWI) can be used to estimate the integrity of white matter tracts
connecting brain regions. The present study used 3-Tesla DWI scans (41
diffusion-weighted and 5 b0 images) of 42 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) participants and 50 normal controls (CN) as part of the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to examine lateralization of executive
function (EF) – a composite score from several implicated neurocognitive
assessments. Although morphometric asymmetries are widely recognized,
lateralization of brain networks in relation to EF is not well understood.
Using whole-brain tractography, we reconstructed connectivity matrices
describing normalized fiber density between cortical regions segmented by
FreeSurfer. A laterality matrix was generated for each subject by subtracting the right from the left hemispheric connectivity matrices. We assessed
the association between these laterality matrices and EF scores using linear
regression with age and gender as covariates. We found a decrease in the
proportion of fibers in the laterality matrix within the insula with decreasing EF scores, indicating a left asymmetry in AD participants. In addition,
fiber density in left hemispheric connections between the insula and frontal cortex areas (superiorfrontal, precentral, caudal middle frontal) also
declined with decreasing EF (FDR p-value=0.8x10-3). In a similar setup,
we assessed the laterality matrix differences between AD and CN (CN=0;
AD=1) and found further evidence of a decrease in the proportion of fibers
in left insula, relative to CN (FDR p-value=0.7x10-3). Results suggest that
the hemispheres in AD may degenerate at different rates with most impairment observed in the left hemisphere.

D108
BRAIN WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN BIPOLAR DISORDER SUBTYPES ASSESSED WITH DIFFUSION TENSOR IMAGING Joshua
Faskowitz1, Jair Soares2, Christopher Ching1, Nicholus Warstadt1, Paul M. Thompson1, Benson Mwangi2, Jennifer L. Kroll2, Neda Jahanshad1; 1University of South-

2015 Annual Meeting
ern California, 2University of Texas Medical School — Bipolar disorder (BP) is

a mood disorder categorized broadly as type I (BP I), defined by intense
manic episodes, type II (BP II), which includes hypomanic and depressive
episodes, and not-otherwise specified (NOS) with similar, yet less severe,
symptoms. Here we characterized white matter structural differences
across different BP subtypes. We measured white matter integrity in adults
(n: 133, mean age: 37.42, 62% women) with diffusion tensor imaging measures (fractional anisotropy [FA], mean diffusivity [MD], and radial diffusivity [RD]) in a voxel-wise analysis across the white matter. Frontal lobe
white matter tracts may be altered in BP and schizophrenia perhaps reflecting myelin anomalies (Adler et al., 2004). Here we found measures of RD
and MD were significantly higher in BP subjects in the left anterior corona
radiata (ACR) and the right superior corona radiata after controlling the
false positive rate (q=0.05) in multiple comparisons across all voxels. Measures of RD and MD were still significantly higher in the left ACR when
limiting the analysis to a comparison of only BP I (n=35) subjects to healthy
controls. No difference was detected for MD or RD in BP II (n=12) and BP
NOS (n=11) when analyzed separately. White matter disruption in BP I,
the clinically more severe condition, supports the observation of a relationship between symptom intensity and disruptions in white matter structure
(Lagopoulos et al., 2013).

D109
THE UNCERTAIN RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BOLD VARIABILITY AND AGE Brian A. Lopez1, Benjamin O. Turner1, Tyler Santander1,2, Misty
Schubert1, Michael B. Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2University of Virginia — Given the vast amount of complex data typically acquired

in fMRI studies, researchers tend to focus their efforts on measures of
central tendency of the time series. However, an increasing number of
researchers have begun to systematically explore within-individual brain
signal variability. Rather than being attributed to mere noise, their findings
suggest that moment-to-moment variability is actually a functional property of the human brain and is related to task performance and changes in
the brain associated with aging and disease. Given this rising interest in
BOLD signal variability, it is important to address certain methodological
issues and possible confounds that may obscure the relationship of interest. Toward that end, we demonstrate the impact of a variety of analysis
choices on the relationship between age and BOLD variability with data
acquired from participants ages 18-75 during a recognition memory test
involving criterion shifting. We show that subtle changes in preprocessing
or analysis strategy can have a profound effect on the qualitative story told
by the data—for example, swinging from a map showing extensive positive
correlation between age and BOLD variability to one showing mostly negative correlation when more stringent corrections (i.e., partialing out grand
mean intensity normalization factor and mean relative motion) are applied.
Given the considerable uncertainty regarding what the true pattern is for
our dataset, we believe caution should be exercised when making claims
about how within-individual brain variability is related to other variables
including age. As we illustrate, the relationship depends critically on the
exact analysis pipeline used.

D110
INTERACTION BETWEEN WHITE MATTER MICROSTRUCTURE
AND BOLD COMPLEXITY ENHANCE BRAIN EFFICIENCY Ian
McDonough1, Jonathan Siegel1; 1University of Texas at Dallas — Brain structure
has been proposed to facilitate as well as constrain functional interactions
within brain networks. Simulation models suggest that white matter microstructure should be positively related to the complexity of BOLD signal—a
measure of network interactions. Using 80 young adults from the Human
Connectome Project, we empirically tested whether greater white matter
microstructure via fractional anisotropy (FA) would be associated with
greater complexity of the BOLD signal during rest via multiscale entropy.
Multiscale entropy measures the randomness of a given time series across
varying time scales and has the advantage of estimating fluctuating signal
dynamics within brain networks. We also tested whether these measures
were associated with processing speed and whether complexity of the
BOLD signal moderated the effects of white matter microstructure on
processing speed. Using multivariate analysis techniques (Partial Least
Squares), we found that greater fractional anisotropy distributed across the
brain was associated with greater BOLD complexity at slower time scales,

Poster Session D
but lower BOLD complexity at faster time scales. These relationships were
found across Dorsal Attention, Ventral Attention, Fronto-Parietal, and
Limbic Networks. In relation to cognition, BOLD complexity moderated
the effects of FA on processing speed; people with high FA values showed
a positive relationship between BOLD complexity and cognition, but no
relationship was found with people with low FA values. These findings
support simulation models of white matter microstructure and BOLD complexity and provide new insights into the brain mechanisms underlying
efficient cognitive processing.

D111
A SEMI-AUTOMATED ALGORITHM FOR SEGMENTING THE HIPPOCAMPUS IN CONTROL AND PATIENT POPULATIONS Nathan
Muncy1, Christopher Doxey1, Naomi Goodrich-Hunsaker2,3,4, Christopher Finuf1,
Mikle South1,4, Brock Kirwan1,4; 1Brigham Young University, Neuroscience,
2
University of California, Davis, MIND Institute, 3University of California, Davis,
Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, 4Brigham Young University, Psychology —
Calculating hippocampal volume from MR images is an essential task in
many cognitive neuroscience studies. The standard hand-tracing method
is accurate but laborious, requiring expertly trained researchers and significant amounts of time. As such, processing large datasets with the standard
method is impractical. Automated processes, like FreeSurfer and FSL’s
First, have been developed to calculate cortical volumes in an automated
fashion, but are insufficiently accurate at hippocampal denotation and
volumetry. We developed a semi-automated hippocampal segmentation
algorithm based on the Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs) suite of
programs. Under this protocol, the researcher places landmarks to denote
the structure of interest and a template segmentation is warped to the individual participants’ native space. This method was compared to traditional
hand segmentation for a group of healthy controls (mean age = 22), a group
of older healthy adults (mean age = 71) and a group of high-functioning
Autistic young adults (mean age = 23). Dice similarity coefficients between
hand segmentations and semi-automated algorithm output were high
(>.7) for all groups, although semi-automated hippocampal volumes were
reliably larger than hand segmentations. Volumes significantly correlated
between hand and semi-automated segmentation methods for all groups.
These results indicate that the semi-automated method is equivalent in performance to the standard method across a variety of populations. Additionally, the semi-automated method requires less time to process MRI data,
less training to become proficient, and is sufficiently adaptable such that it
accurately calculates hippocampal volumes in diverse groups.

D112
DISTINCT CONNECTION PROPERTIES BETWEEN MORPHOLOGICAL CORRELATION NETWORKS: CORTICAL THICKNESS, SURFACE AREA, AND GRAY MATTER VOLUME Jin-Ju Yang1, Jong-Min Lee1;
1

Hanyang University — Structural correlation networks are constructed by a
set of nodes that correspond to brain regions and a set of connection edges
that correspond to statistical correlations in morphometric values between
regions across individuals. Although gray matter volume, thickness, and
surface area have been frequently used as a measure of structural association between brain regions, their relationships are poorly investigated.
In this study, we characterized the degree of convergence and divergence
edges assessing for the first time the concept of Venn-diagram to compare
three morphological networks as measured in the same subjects. We also
compared the network properties such as clustering coefficient, characteristic path length, small-worldness, global efficiency and betweenness
centrality in these three networks. Structural magnetic resonance imaging
data from 78 young healthy adults were measured gray matter volume,
cortical thickness, surface area. For each cortical measure, inter-regional
correlation maps were computed. Common edges in three networks were
showed consistent 12 % of convergence at all network sparsity range found
in most brain areas such as inter-hemispheric connection. When increasing
network sparsity, the common edges in two networks increased but divergence edges in each network decreased. The observed network parameters revealed similar pattern whereas the hub regions were discrepancy in
three networks. These findings provide direct evidence for the distinction

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

141

Poster Session D
between these morphological correlation networks. The differences probably reflect the different information supporting region-specific neuroanatomical mechanisms.

D113
BETA-ADRENERGIC ANTAGONISM MODULATES DEFAULT MODE
NETWORK COHERENCE IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER John P.
Hegarty II1, Bradley J. Ferguson1, Rachel M. Zamzow1, Landon J. Rohowetz1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1, Shawn E. Christ1, David Q. Beversdorf1; 1University of Missouri
— Altered functional connectivity (FC) is implicated in autism spectrum

disorder (ASD) with the majority of studies suggesting local hyper-connectivity and long distance hypo-connectivity. Beta-adrenergic antagonism,
such as the use of propranolol, benefits social and communication domains
in ASD and performance benefits on language tasks following propranolol
administration have been associated with increased FC. The cognitive and
behavioral benefits from propranolol administration may be due to pharmacological effects on network coherence improving cognitive processing.
Resting-state fMRI data was acquired to assess drug-related changes in network coherence. Utilizing a graph theoretical approach, we assessed the
effects of beta-adrenergic antagonism on resting state network coherence in
individuals with ASD compared to unaffected individuals, with particular
emphasis on the default mode network (DMN). DMN regions were also
segregated into subnetworks using the Louvain algorithm for community
detection. Regardless of diagnosis, beta-adrenergic antagonism decreased
FC and network efficiency in the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex subnetwork of the DMN and increased connectivity and network efficiency in the
medial temporal lobe subnetwork. However, these alterations in network
coherence appeared to be due to diagnostic group specific effects on functional organization. Network coherence and functional organization effects
were primarily not seen with nadolol, a peripheral beta-adrenegic antagonist, suggesting these findings were not due to peripheral cardiovascular effects on the BOLD signal. Our findings suggest that beta-adrenergic
antagonism may be able to up- or down- regulate specific subnetworks in
the brain and differentially affect functional organization of the DMN in
individuals with ASD as compared to controls.

D114
ITERATIVE LASSO: AN EVEN-HANDED APPROACH TO WHOLE
BRAIN MVPA Christopher Cox1, Qihong LU1, Timothy T ROGERS; 1University
of Wisconsin -- Madison — A long-standing issue in cognitive neuroscience

is whether mental representations are encoded by distributed activation
widely dispersed in the brain or within dedicated cortical regions. The
question has been difficult to adjudicate with brain imaging since standard
statistical methods assume localized representations and so are insensitive
to distributed signal. We introduce a new method for whole brain multivoxel pattern classification, the iterated LASSO, that makes no assumptions about the anatomical distribution of the underlying signal and so
provides an unbiased way of assessing whether neural representations are
localized or distributed. We show through analysis of synthetic data that
the method’s accuracy does not depend on the anatomical arrangement of
signal-carrying voxels, and that the method ameliorates some of the problems with other whole-brain approaches. We then applied the method to
fMRI data in a domain where representations are widely thought to be
localized, specifically the visual representation of faces, places, and objects.
Consistent with the canonical view from univariate methods, we found that
voxels within the putative face recognition system were more likely than
other randomly-sampled voxels to consistently discriminate face from nonface stimuli. Nevertheless the great majority of signal-carrying voxels were
found to lie outside the canonical face-processing system. These voxels
were widely distributed anatomically, and their locations varied dramatically across individuals, so they cannot be identified using standard
univariate contrasts. The results raise the possibility that neuro-cognitive
representations may be considerably less anatomically localized than has
previously been thought.

142

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

D115
ALTERED RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL NETWORK AND MODULAR TOPOLOGY IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER, PHENYLKETONURIA, AND TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY Rachel M. Zamzow1, Jeffrey D. Johnson1, John P. Hegarty II1, Gary Yao1, David Q. Beversdorf1, Shawn E.
Christ1; 1University of Missouri — Previous studies have suggested alterations

in functional connectivity (FC), as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in individuals with neurological conditions. In the
present study, we used graph theoretical analysis to examine how functional network topology differs based on diagnosis. Resting state fMRI
data was collected from individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD,
N=61), phenylketonuira (PKU, N=12), traumatic brain injury (TBI, N=18),
and 61 typically developing (TD) individuals. Partial correlation matrices
for 90 regions were generated and topological properties were compared
between groups. The ASD group demonstrated reduced local network
organization (decreased local network efficiency and likelihood of shortrange connections, p < .05) and a bias toward greater global network organization (increased global network efficiency and likelihood of long-range
connections, p < .05), as compared to the TD group. The PKU and TBI
groups demonstrated the opposite pattern, showing more local organization (p < .001). In subsequent analyses, 13 identified modules were compared between groups for topology. The ASD group demonstrated reduced
density in a temporal module (p < .01). The PKU group showed reduced
FC in frontoparietal and orbitofrontal modules (p < .01). Lastly, the TBI
group displayed widespread reduced efficiency and FC in 10/13 modules
(p < .01). The results of the present study indicate alterations in functional
network and modular organization in multiple neurological conditions.
Future studies are needed to explore how the present findings fit into the
context of other FC literature, as well as characterize network alterations
across development and symptom severity.

D116
FUNCTIONAL CHANGE OF POSTPARTUM DECLINE IN RESTING-STATE: ANALYZING DEGREE CENTRALITY, HOMOTOPIC
CONNECTIVITY, AND MULTIVARIATE PATTERN OF FUNCTIONAL
CONNECTIVITY Sehjung Yi1, Na-Young Shin2, Yoonjin Nah1, Sanghoon Han1,
Seung-Koo Lee2; 1Yonsei University, 2Yonsei University College of Medicine —
Postpartum decline has been reported on both subjective and clinical levels,
but most of studies lack efforts to find pathology of the deficiency utilizing
neurological measures. Even more, cognitive domain was overlooked while
most of focuses was given on emotional aspects of the problem. For our
study, we collected subjective reports on cognitive deficiencies and functional resting-state data from postpartum subjects and analyzed against
control group. Significant statistical difference on subjectively reported cognitive deficiencies existed between two groups. To locate neural basis of the
reported deficiency, voxel-level degree centrality (DC) and voxel-mirrored
homotopic connectivity (VMHC) along with multi-variate pattern analysis
on functional connectivities (fcMVPA) among important regions were calculated and applied. fcMVPA found outstanding discrimination accuracies
within connectivities of frontal gyri, and among cognition-related regions
including bilateral frontal gyri, hippocampi, and precunei. Significantly
lowered DC on bilateral hippocampi, parahippocampal gyri, left orbitofrontal gyrus, and left anterior cingulate cortex was found in postpartum
over control group while left superior frontal gyrus and right middle temporal gyrus showed the opposite. Analysis of homotopic connectivities
revealed weaker homotopic functional connectivities of hippocampus, precuneus, and anterior and middle cingulate cortices of postpartum subjects.
Our analyses yielded results that are lying in the same direction to the subjectively reported postpartum cognitive deficiencies of subjects and offers
insight into neural correlates of postpartum cognitive deficiencies.

2015 Annual Meeting

METHODS: Other
D117
VALIDATION OF AN AUTOMATED COGNITIVE ASSESSMENT
INSTRUMENT Charlotte Housden1,2, Linda Hermans1, Jenny Barnett1,2,
Francesca Cormack1, Andy Blackwell1,2; 1Cambridge Cognition, Cambridge,
UK, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK — Technological

advances enable measurement of neurocognitive function outside the laboratory, potentially allowing high-frequency, large-scale data collection.
However, it is important to demonstrate that data collected via automated
testing is equivalent to that from face-to-face testing. This study compared
cognitive performance measured using Cantab Connect Research delivered on an iPad to the established Cantab Research Suite software delivered on a Motion touchscreen tablet. Compared to the Cantab Research
Suite, the Cantab Connect Research tests were shorter (20-25 min versus
15 min). Importantly, test instructions in Cantab Connect Research were
delivered using an automated voiceover, whereas in Cantab Research Suite
a rater read a standardised script. Seventy-one healthy individuals aged
19 to 67 (M± SD: 40.4 ± 14.7) completed tests from Cantab Research Suite
and Cantab Connect Research at 3 time points. Tests assessed psychomotor
processing (Cantab Reaction Time: RTI), episodic memory (Cantab Paired
Associates Learning: PAL), and executive function (Cantab Spatial Working Memory: SWM). There was a strong correspondence between performance on the two platforms for RTI (r71= 0.82, p< 0.001), PAL (r71= 0.68,
p< 0.001) and SWM (r71= 0.68, p< 0.001). Cantab Connect Research had
high test-retest reliabilities for RTI (r71= 0.81, p< 0.001), PAL (r71= 0.85,
p< 0.001) and SWM (r71= 0.74, p< 0.001). Similar values were obtained
using Cantab Research Suite (RTI (r71= 0.81, p< 0.001), PAL (r71= 0.79, p<
0.001) and SWM (r71= 0.88, p< 0.001)). Our results demonstrate that Cantab
Connect Research has good test-retest properties and good correspondence
with the established Cantab Research Suite technology.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
D118
A MODEL OF CEREBELLAR GATING OF BASAL GANGLIA SELECTION PROCESSES Matthew Boggess1, Matthew Crossley1, Richard Ivry1;
1
University of California, Berkeley — Natural behavior must solve a credit
assignment problem between action selection and execution. E.g., a tennis
player faced with a shot hit directly at her must select between a forehand
or a backhand return. If her return is unsuccessful, how does she know
whether her mistake was in her choice of shot (selection error), or whether
she simply executed the chosen shot poorly (execution error)? We explored
the hypothesis that execution errors limit modification of selection policies,
motivated by consideration of anatomical links between the cerebellum
(CB) and basal ganglia (BG), as well as CB projections on dopamine (DA)
neurons. We built a biologically detailed spiking network of the BG, assuming that 1) action selection policies are learned via DA-dependent synaptic
plasticity at cortico-striatal synapses, 2) DA cell firing reflects reward prediction errors, and 3) learning rates at cortico-striatal synapses are scaled
by execution errors (presumably reflecting CB output to BG input and DA
neurons). This model successfully accounts for new data showing that classic risk averse decision making is switched to risk seeking when learning on
risky trials is paired with large execution errors. We conclude by discussing
the anatomy and physiology of how our algorithmic model of CB function
may be reconciled with more biologically detailed network models of the
CB.

D119
ELIMINATING MIRROR RESPONSES BY INSTRUCTIONS Lara Bardi1,
Carsten Bundt1, Wim Notebaert1, Marcel Brass1; 1University of Gent — The obser-

vation of an action leads to the activation of the corresponding motor plan
in the observer. This phenomenon of motor resonance has an important
role in social interaction, promoting imitation, learning and action understanding. However, mirror responses not always have a positive impact
on our behavior. An automatic tendency to imitate others can introduce
interference in action execution and non-imitative or opposite responses
have an advantage in some contexts. Previous studies suggest that mirror

Poster Session D
tendencies can be suppressed after extensive practice or in complementary
joint action situations revealing that mirror responses are more flexible than
previously thought. The aim of the present study was to gain insight into
the mechanisms that allow response flexibility of motor mirroring. With
this end in mind, we measured motor-evoked potentials (induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation) during the observation of hand movements
in the context of imitative and counter-imitative task instructions. We
showed that the mere instructions of a counter-imitative mapping changes
mirror responses at the physiological level. Importantly, mirror activation
was measured while participants were passively watching movements,
without having the opportunity to execute the task. This result suggests
that the implementation of task instructions activates stimulus-response
association that can overwrite the mirror system. Our outcome reveals one
of the crucial mechanisms that might allow flexible adjustments of mirror
responses in different contexts.

D120
VISUOMOTOR ADAPTATION IS SPECIFIC TO MOVEMENT DYNAMICS Jiang Lan Fan1, Matthew Crossley1, Richard Ivry1; 1University of California,
Berkeley — Interference between motor skills, and how it might be cir-

cumvented, is a fundamental problem in motor learning. Humans cannot
typically learn to compensate for conflicting sensorimotor perturbations,
even when provided with explicit contextual cues (e.g., color indicating the
direction of a visuomotor rotation). However, recent work has shown successful learning of opposing force fields when the field direction is signaled
via dynamic cues (e.g., by unique starting positions), suggesting an important constraint underlying the formation of motor memories (Howard et al.,
J Neurophysiology 2012). We find that a similar result holds for visuomotor
adaptation and extend this work to assess the independence of these memories by examining interference effects in memory retention and recall. We
used a design in which two blocks of movements with a clockwise rotation were separated by a washout block in which the rotation was removed
(ABA). We compared conditions in which the dynamic cues in the washout
block were identical to or different from the initial cues in the adaptation
blocks. A different set of dynamic cues in the washout block preserved
learning: When the initial cues were reintroduced in the reacquisition
block, adaptation immediately returned to a level approximately equal to
that observed at the end of initial acquisition. This pattern was observed
even when the rotation was introduced and washed out gradually, thereby
eliminating potential contributions from non-motor processes such as strategic aiming. Our results support the notion that dynamic cues lead to the
formation of independent motor memories.

D121
CONTRIBUTION OF AUDITORY FEEDBACK TO POSTURAL STABILITY Jessica Marie Ross1, Ramesh Balasubramaniam1; 1University of California,
Merced — Human balance control is a multisensory process that is known to
rely on visual, vestibular and somatosensory feedback. Although auditory
information influences balance, much less is known about the mechanisms
underlying this process, especially the role of acoustic noise. We examined
the effect of auditory noise on postural sway variability in 19 participants
by tracking fluctuations in their center of pressure (CoP) using a force platform. We found reduced CoP variability in the presence of auditory noise,
which is similar to the reduction in variability with vision. Nonlinear time
series analysis revealed that auditory noise has an additive effect, independent of vision, on postural stability. We used filtering to distinguish low
(<0.3 Hz) and high frequency (>0.3 Hz) components of sway. Variability
analyses of the filtered data demonstrated that for low frequency sway,
noise interacts with vision, whereas for high frequency sway, the effect is
additive. Our results support the idea that noise in the auditory modality, like somatosensory noise, reduces postural sway variability and that it
might be due to similar sensory stochastic resonance mechanisms. It would
be important to explore the role of noise in reducing the postural sway
variability in older adults and those with balance disorders due to central
nervous system dysfunction.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

143

Poster Session D

D122
IT’S NOT THE GOAL, BUT THE JOURNEY: GRASPING ADVANTAGE
FOR HAND-TO-MOUTH MOVEMENT REQUIRES SIMULTANEOUS
MOUTH OPENING. Jason Flindall1, Claudia Gonzalez1; 1University of Lethbridge — Previous research has shown that grasping movements use smaller
maximum grip apertures (MGAs) when a participant intends to transport
a food item to the mouth; grasps to place the same item in a receptacle
near the mouth use significantly larger MGAs. As limb transport phases
of both movements are mechanically identical, this suggests that these
actions may be initiated and controlled by distinct neural networks. Results
from primate studies support this theory, as direct electrical stimulation
to the macaque motor cortex may cause either grasp-to-inspect or handto-mouth movements. However, elicited hand-to-mouth movements are
always coupled with simultaneous mouth opening; we therefore hypothesized that simultaneous mouth opening may itself prompt smaller MGAs,
irrespective of the movement’s end-goal. Participants grasped food items
to either bring them to the mouth (MOUTH), or place them in a container
near the mouth (CONTAINER). Participants opened their mouths as if to
eat the item during 50% of trials (OPEN), with the mouth remaining closed
during all other trials (CLOSED). Kinematic analysis revealed that participants produced smaller MGAs in the MOUTH/OPEN condition than in
both MOUTH/CLOSED and CONTAINER/OPEN conditions. In CLOSED
conditions, end-goal did not affect a change in MGA. Furthermore, larger
MGAs were produced in the CONTAINER/OPEN condition than in all
other conditions. These results suggest first that, contrary to our hypothesis,
concurrent mouth movement may interfere with normal hand pre-shaping
during grasping actions not directed toward the mouth. Second, grasp-toeat movements have an ecological, and perhaps evolutionary, relevance
extending beyond the sum of their parts.

D123
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF EEG AND MOTION CAPTURE DURING
A DART THROWING VISUOSPATIAL WORKING MEMORY TASK
Robert Gougelet1, Scott Makeig2; 1UCSD, 2Swartz Center for Computational
Neuroscience — With an embodied cognition perspective at the forefront

of recent cognitive theory, the link between brain activity and full body
motion will become increasingly important. Few studies combine full
body motion and electroencephalography (EEG), especially in visuospatial
working memory tasks. This study involves humans performing a novel
visuospatial delayed response working memory task. For each trial, a ceiling mounted projector projects a target stimulus onto a large white cork
board. After a randomly variable 3 to 9 s integer delay, the subjects throw
a dart to the persistently displayed or remembered position of the target.
Continuous EEG data were collected using 128 active electrodes. The continuous EEG data were decomposed into maximally independent components using independent component analysis (ICA). Full-body kinematic
motion data were collected from 32 LED locations on the limbs, torsos, and
heads of the subjects. The behavioral data reveal a decrease in precision
and accuracy of dart throws when throwing from memory, which grows as
the delay length increases. Time-frequency interactions among equivalent
dipole projections of continuous and event-related EEG were investigated
during the delay period and during the throw. Theta, alpha, and gamma
dynamics were identified to correspond with throwing from memory
versus throwing to a visible target. Examination of interactions between
EEG features and throw execution and performance is forthcoming, particularly as these dynamics evolve over time, throughout the task.

THINKING: Reasoning
D124
ANTERIOR PREFRONTAL CORTEX AND RELATIONAL REASONING
DURING ADOLESCENCE: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY
Robert G Morrison1, Valerie Flores1, Elise Gagnon2, Sarah Zaza1, Amanda Sweis1;
1
Loyola University Chicago, 2Northwestern University — Neuroimaging studies

have suggested that rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (RLPFC) is associated
with relational integration, a capacity critical for relational reasoning.
Recently, we adapted a geometric analogy paradigm for use with EEG
and identified a response-locked ERP using a task subtraction to isolate

144

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
relational integration (Nikitin & Morrison, 2011). The mean amplitude of
this ERP was strongly correlated with reasoning accuracy. A prior neuroimaging study using this same paradigm suggested that structural and
functional RLPFC changes during adolescence support changes in relational reasoning (Dumentheil et al., 2010). The present study tested 13- to
25-year-old females (adolescent group: n=13, 13.8 - 18.9 years; emerging
adult group: n=16, 19.3 - 25.1 years) using this visual analogy paradigm.
We also indexed participants’ fluid and crystallized intelligence using the
NIH toolbox. The two age groups showed no reliable accuracy or response
time differences in either the control or relational integration task. Consistent with our prior study of young adults, we found a reliable late positive
response-locked ERP corresponding to relational integration. However,
the adolescent group failed to show this subtraction ERP. Across all participants the subtraction was strongly correlated with fluid intelligence as
measured via the NIH toolbox. These results suggest that RLPFC activity
during relational integration is strongly associated with fluid intelligence
and its development may be a critical factor in achieving mature relational
reasoning ability.

D125
GAZE PATTERNS REVEAL STRATEGIES DURING ANALOGICAL
REASONING Michael Vendetti1, Elizabeth Johnson1, Silvia Bunge1; 1University of California, Berkeley — Analogical reasoning is a cognitive process in
which similarities are made between two domains based on shared relations, rather than on perceptual or semantic similarity. Proportional analogy tasks (e.g., HANDS:GLOVES::FEET:?) allow control over the types of
items involved in mapping the A:B relation (i.e., hands wear gloves) to the
appropriate C:D combination (e.g., feet wear shoes). One could first focus
on the A:B pair, extract the relation, and use this to discover the solution.
However, given that A:B terms have many potential relations (e.g., hands
could also knit gloves), another view suggests response choices constrain
the decision, and predicts that semantic and perceptual distractors should
greatly influence participants’ responses. To test these two views, we measured eye gaze patterns in 34 healthy young adults while they solved analogies. We observed a significant interaction between location (top: partial
analogy versus bottom: response choices) and accuracy (correct vs. incorrect analogy trials) on fixation duration, F (1,31) = 7.55, p < .01, ηpartial2 =
.2. On correct trials, participants spent a greater proportion of time looking
at the top versus bottom location, t(31)=4.28, p < .001, whereas no such difference was observed on incorrect trials, p > .64. Additionally, we observed
a significant positive correlation between the ratio of top versus bottom
fixation duration and proportion accuracy (r = .54). These results suggest
that extracting the relation between the A:B pair (as defined by more time
spent in the top location) is much more critical to solving analogy problems.

D126
PREDICTING PRACTICE-RELATED GAINS IN STANDARDIZED
TEST PERFORMANCE FROM CORTICAL THICKNESS Belen Guerra-Carrillo1, Allyson P. Mackey2, Silvia A. Bunge1; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology — We have previously reported

experience-dependent changes in structural and functional connectivity
within the lateral fronto-parietal network in young adults who participated
in an intensive 3-month course to prepare for the Law School Admissions
Test (LSAT), a test that places heavy demands on reasoning skills (Mackey
et al., 2011; 2012; under review). Some individuals benefited more from
the course than others, showing larger gains across 3-4 LSAT practice tests
regardless of their initial scores. Here, we sought to test for structural predictors of individual differences in learning trajectories in this adult dataset. In a longitudinal study of reasoning development over childhood and
adolescence, we previously showed that that thinner (i.e., more mature)
left inferior parietal cortex is a strong predictor of future reasoning ability
(Wendelken et al., under review). Here, we asked whether cortical thickness in left inferior parietal cortex prior to test preparation would be predictive of gains on the LSAT. Indeed, thickness of left supramarginal gyrus
at time 1 was a robust negative predictor of change in LSAT scores (b= -.55,
t(18)= -2.66, p<.05), even after controlling for age (R2= .56, F(2,18)= 3.63,
p<.05). This result was not obtained for right supramarginal gyrus or for
superior parietal lobule or angular gyrus, and could not be explained by
variability in time 1 LSAT scores or intracranial volume. These results sug-

2015 Annual Meeting
gest that structural maturation within a specific portion of the left inferior
parietal lobule is a strong predictor of learning in adulthood on a test that
places heavy demands on reasoning.

D127
SEE THAT NUMBER? THE ROLE OF VISUOSPATIAL ABILITIES
AND BRAIN STIMULATION IN SYMBOLIC NUMERICAL LEARNING
Jacqueline Thompson1, Hannah Rafferty1, Arwel Pritchard1, Roi Cohen Kadosh1;
1
University of Oxford — Visuospatial abilities (e.g., mental rotation) have been

linked to strength of basic numerical representations. However, the causality of this link is still uncertain; to what extent does the ability to recognise and visuospatially manipulate number symbols help us to learn their
semantic (ordinal or magnitude) values? Therefore, this experiment tested
mental rotation ability and visual symbol recognition ability in a group of
79 adults before and after they undertook intensive multi-day training paradigms to learn novel numerical symbols. 40 of these participants received
transcranial random noise stimulation (TRNS), a form of noninvasive
electrical neuroenhancement, to either parietal or occipital cortices during
learning. Stimulation did not affect mental rotation or visual symbol recognition. However, learning rate of the symbols correlated with a pre-test of
3D (but not 2D) mental rotation, as well as with symbol recognition ability
measured after, but not before, training of the symbols’ relative magnitudes. Similarly, a measure of numerical representation strength (numerical distance effect) in the symbols correlated with symbol recognition after,
but not before, training. Because the numerical distance effect is a measure
that cancels out the contribution of visual processing to performance, these
results are interpreted as suggesting that greater visual recognition of symbols may play a role in forming stronger numerical representation when
learning novel numerical symbols.

D128
TRACKING THE NEURAL DYNAMICS OF HYPOTHESIS EVALUATION WITH MODEL-BASED FMRI Nicole Marinsek1, Benjamin O. Turner1,
Chloe Steindam1, Michael B. Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara —
In this study, we aimed to 1) model the component processes of hypothesis evaluation during the receipt of new evidence and 2) identify brain
regions that support these processes. We used fMRI data from a previous
experiment in which participants attempted to generate appropriate category labels for a series of novel word sets that were designed to either
elicit repeated cycles of hypothesis formation and evaluation (“ad hoc”
word sets) or minimize these processes (“control” word sets). We used a
Bayesian model to estimate the strength of subjects’ category hypotheses
as the words in each set were presented, after first collecting behavioral
data on a different group of participants to estimate latent variables in the
model. We then conducted a model-based fMRI analysis of the fMRI data
to identify brain regions that are sensitive to the various predictions of our
Bayesian model, such as hypothesis strength, belief updating, or hypothesis acceptance. The results of this study provide insight into the psychological and neural processes of hypothesis evaluation, as well as the validity of
Bayes’ theorem as a model of belief updating in humans. This research was
supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies under grant
W911NF-09-D-0001.

D129
EVIDENCE OF INTACT SOCIAL ANALOGICAL REASONING IN ASD
Natalie Gallagher1, Ligia Antezana2, Maya Mosner2, Katerina Dudley3, Lauren
Kenworthy3, Benjamin Yerys2, Adam Green1; 1Georgetown University, 2The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3Children’s National Medical Center — Social

cognition is a weakness for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD),
but reasoning is often a strength.So what if an aspect of social cognition
is approached as a reasoning problem? Analogical reasoning is a form of
reasoning that supports our understanding of social interactions because
novel interactions may be analogous to previously experienced interactions. Analogical reasoning with non-social stimuli appears to be well-preserved in ASD, but has not been tested in ASD with social interaction
stimuli. We tested the hypothesis that when explicitly cued, children with
ASD can employ analogical reasoning to understand similarities between
social interactions, using photographs of real-world interactions. Ageand IQ-matched ASD and control groups performed social and nonsocial

Poster Session D
analogies. In older children with ASD (over age 10), social analogy performance rose to the level of controls, and to the level of nonsocial analogy
performance. Effects of age and socialness (social analogies vs. nonsocial
analogies) indicate that general analogical reasoning ability develops at a
lag in ASD relative to typical development but that, once developed, this
ability can be applied to counteract impairing effects of social content in
ASD cognition.

D130
INFERRING REASONING STRATEGIES BASED ON THE PUPILLARY RESPONSE Maria K. Eckstein12, Silvia A. Bunge1; 1UC Berkeley, 2Graduate School of Systemic Neurosciences, Munich, Germany — When faced with a

cognitively demanding task, the choice of strategy can make all the difference. Here, we sought to gain insight into strategies that participants adopt
spontaneously when solving a task that requires integrating multiple rules.
We hypothesized that strategies could be assessed using real-time measures of cognitive effort, such as the task-evoked pupillary response. To
test this hypothesis, we collected eyetracking data while 37 healthy adults
completed a rule integration task that could be solved in several ways. We
first modeled the cognitive demands of two strategies, and made specific
predictions about performance (response time, accuracy). We then compared the cognitive demand models to the pupillary responses obtained
from each participant during task performance to infer which strategy the
participant had used. Performance differences were successfully predicted
by the pupil-based strategies. Specifically, when using a feature encoding
strategy (participants encode all item features before identifying relevant
rules) participants were significantly slower than when using a rule induction strategy (participants induce relevant rules while encoding the items
and categorize subsequent items accordingly), t(15.9) = -1.97, p = .033, r =
.44. In addition, error rates in detecting rule-based oddballs were reduced
from 8.6% to 3.6% when using the rule induction strategy, t(18.5) = -1.61,
p = .063, r = .35. Participants’ self-reported strategies were consistent with
predictions based on the pupillometry data, suggesting that our approach
could also be used to study strategies in individuals with poor metacognitive skills, such as children or patient populations.

D131
CONCEPT COMBINATION WITH LOGICAL CONNECTIVES Paolo
Cherubini1,3, Giosué Baggio2,3, Doris Pischedda1,3,4, Kai Görgen4, Anna Blumenthal2,4, John-Dylan Haynes4, Carlo Reverberi1,3; 1University of Milano-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy, 2SISSA International School for Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy,
3
NeuroMi- Milan Center for Neuroscience, Milan, Italy, 4Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany —
A defining trait of cognition is the capacity to combine information into
compound concepts. This ability relies, among others, on the logical connectives ‘and’, ‘or’ and ‘if-then’. Simple sentences, such as “there is a fork
on the table” (A) or “there is a knife” (B), can be combined in different ways
using different connectives. No evidence is available to date on how and
where the brain represents different concept combinations produced by
different connectives, and how these are evaluated against new facts. Here,
participants learned associations between graphic cues and conjunctive (A
and B), disjunctive (A or B) or conditional (If A then B) sentences. During
fMRI scanning, a cue was presented, followed by a delay, during which
participants had to represent the sentence associated to the cue; finally, a
visual scene had to be evaluated for compatibility with the sentence. Two
participant groups were recruited so that conditionals (If A then B) were
interpreted in either of two alternative ways (thus, same form, different
semantics). Multivariate decoding applied to the delay period revealed
that the active sentence was encoded in left inferior frontal gyrus (BA44).
During the delay, no difference was found between participant groups.
During the target phase, we found higher activations in rostral regions of
left inferior frontal cortex (BA47), for disjunctions and conditionals relative
to conjunctions. Activation of the inferior parietal lobe only was modulated
by the interpretation of conditionals.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

145

Poster Session D

D132
THE IMPACT OF STIMULUS-INDUCED PROCESSING STRATEGIES
ON SYMBOLIC FRACTION REPRESENTATIONS Elizabeth Y. Toomarian1, Edward M. Hubbard1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison — Understand-

ing fractions is key to establishing a solid foundation in mathematics, yet
children and adults struggle to comprehend them. Previous studies have
suggested that these struggles emerge because people fail to process fraction magnitude holistically on the mental number line (MNL), a process
reliant on parietofrontal brain networks (Hubbard et al., 2005). Bonato et al.
(2007) found that fraction processing was characterized by componential
processing, as demonstrated by componential distance effects and a reverse
SNARC effect. Subsequent studies of the distance effect for fractions have
demonstrated holistic processing, and have suggested that componential
processing was due to the limited stimulus set used (Meert et al., 2009;
2010). However, no studies have returned to investigate the spatial representation of fractions using stimuli that minimize componential strategies.
We therefore conducted three behavioral studies: Experiment 1 replicated
Bonato et al. (2007); 24 college undergraduate participants compared unit
fractions (1/1-1/9) to 1/5, resulting in a reverse SNARC effect for reaction
times. Experiments 2 and 3 had participants compare fractions to 1/2 and
3/5, respectively, and reduced potential strategic biases by expanding the
stimulus set to include all irreducible, proper fractions. We observed a classic, categorical SNARC effect for overall fraction magnitude, demonstrating that participants can indeed represent holistic fraction magnitudes on a
spatial MNL. The categorical rather than continuous SNARC effect reflects
the magnitude dependent nature of the tasks. Taken together, these data
suggest that adults can process fraction magnitudes holistically, and that
stimulus-induced processing strategies can dramatically influence how
adults represent fractions.

D133
DUAL PROCESS THEORY AND THE POLITICAL BELIEF BIAS
EFFECT Makiah R. Nuutinen1, Dane Wendell1, Richard Matland1, Robert G.
Morrison1; 1Loyola University Chicago — Cognitive neuroscience methods
have contributed greatly to our understanding of distinct fast and slow
processing systems useful for higher-level cognition. We believe these
dual-processes help explain why political beliefs can make it difficult for
politicians to agree on significant policy decisions. While recent research
suggests that people have an immediate and intuitive reaction of skepticism to opposing political views, recent neurocognitive research (Amodio
et al. 2007) suggests that liberals appear to have a more flexible cognitive
style. We designed a novel political belief bias paradigm to test how logical reasoning interacts with strongly held political heuristics. We predicted
that liberals would be well suited to suppressing their political beliefs in
order to engage in formal logical reasoning compared to political conservatives. Our findings confirm our hypotheses. We found that conservatives
show a much greater belief bias effect than liberals when the content of the
problem is political. This effect persists even when controlling for level of
political knowledge and fluid intelligence, and is not explained by belief
strength. Our results suggest that conservatives may have more difficulty
inhibiting their fast political knowledge system in order to employ the slow
logical reasoning system in the context of political information. In contrast,
liberals may have a more flexible cognitive style, allowing them to engage
in analytic reasoning more readily. Future studies will use neuroimaging
to examine the time course of processing in liberals and conservatives to
determine the mechanism responsible for the observed differences.

146

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E
ATTENTION: Auditory
E1
THE TEST OF ATTENTION IN LISTENING: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL STUDY Hannah Jamieson Stewart1,2, Sygal Amitay1, Claude
Alain2; 1MRC Institute of Hearing Research, Nottingham, UK, 2Rotman Research
Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Canada — The Test of Attention in Listening

(TAiL) is a behavioural test designed to assess auditory selective attention
in clinical populations using non-verbal stimuli. In a block of trials, participants indicate whether two tones, presented sequentially, have the same
frequency or location depending on the task’s instruction. A key part of
TAiL’s methodology is that the stimuli do not change throughout the task;
just the instructions to the individual do – to pay attention to either the
frequency or the location of the tones. Through different combinations of
task-relevant and -irrelevant stimulus features, the test provides sensitive
measures of distraction and conflict resolution. This study aimed to explore
the underlying neurological networks involved in TAiL’s different measures, using electroencephalography (EEG). Data was collected from 16
individuals aged 18-30. For the distraction measure, a positive component
peaking at ~250ms post the onset of the second tone was found – a distraction positivity. Source analysis of this component suggest different sources
for the two TAiL tasks (attending to frequency and location), with distraction by location more posterior than distraction by frequency, providing
support for the dual-pathway theory. For the conflict resolution measure, a
negative frontocentral component (300-450ms) was found reflecting auditory and visual conflict resolution tasks (e.g. the Stroop task). These results
reveal distinct neural correlates for distraction and conflict resolution measures. The timing and distribution suggest a progression from sensory
encoding to stimulus-response mapping providing further support for the
use of TAiL as a selective auditory attention task for clinical populations.

E2
NEURAL MECHANISMS FOR PROCESSING SPEECH IN NOISE
IN OLDER ADULTS Samuel Evans1, Dana Boebinger1, Cesar Lima1,3, Stuart
Rosen2, Markus Ostarek1, Angela Gelic1, Carolyn McGettigan4, Zarinah Agnew5,
Sophie Scott1; 1Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, 2Dept of Speech, Hearing and Phonetic Sciences, UCL, 3Dept of Psychology, University of Porto, 4Dept of
Psychology, Royal Holloway, 5Dept of Otolaryngology, University of California, San
Francisco — Adults often report that they find listening to speech in the presence of background noise more effortful as they get older. Whilst a small
number of studies have examined the neural basis of perception in noise in
older adults, these studies have tended to examine neural responses to a
single type of noise background. However, in our everyday life we encounter many kinds of background noise, for example noise from machinery and the speech of others, and these differing masking sounds draw
upon different neural mechanisms. Here we compared neural responses
between younger (n=19, mean age= 25, sd=5.26, range=19-36) and older
adults (n=19, mean age=68, sd=3.07, range=63-75) using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging. In the scanner, participants listened passively to
short spoken narratives presented either without noise or in the presence of
masking sounds that differed ”parametrically” in their similarity to speech.
Whilst behavioural performance on masking tasks was equivalent between
the younger and older participants, neural activation patterns differed
between the groups. Older participants showed reduced activity in sensory cortices, and increased activity in cognitive control regions, consistent
with the decline-compensation hypothesis. In addition, older participants
showed reduced activity at the onset of masking, suggesting a deficit in
stream segregation. Taken together, our results demonstrate that well-performing older adults achieve their high levels of accuracy in perception
in noise tasks via different neural mechanisms to those used by younger
adults.

E3
CONFLICT-RELATED NEGATIVITY IS MEDIATED BY GLUTAMATERGIC NEUROTRANSMISSION IN THE RIGHT ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX Susanne Passow1,2, Alexander R. Craven1,2, Kristiina
Kompus1,2, Karsten Specht1,3, René Westerhausen1,3, Kenneth Hugdahl1,2,3;
University of Bergen, Norway, 2University of Oslo, Norway, 3Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway — Challenging listening situations with competing
1

auditory inputs require cognitive control to focus on relevant and ignore
irrelevant information. Recent dichotic listening (DL) studies have shown
that the strength of blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal changes
in response to cognitive control demands is predicted by glutamate concentration in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC; Falkenberg et al., 2012,
2014). Further, an event-related potential (ERP) study revealed that a fronto-central negativity, approximately 450ms after stimulus onset, is more
negative in high compared to low task demands in the DL task (i.e. N450
modulation effect; Passow et al., 2014). So far, the underlying neuromodulatory mechanisms of the N450 modulation effect are still not clear. Thus,
in the present study we combined proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(1H-MRS) and electroencephalography (EEG) to examine the relationship
between inter-individual differences in the concentration of glutamatergic
metabolites in the ACC and the N450 modulation effect. We collected data
from twenty-two (11 female) healthy young adults. In line with previous
findings, the N450 amplitude was modulated by cognitive control demand
(F(1,21)=30.83, p<.001, η2=.09). More crucially, we found a significant positive correlation (r=.433; p<.05) between glutamate+glutamine (Glx) concentration in the right ACC and the magnitude of the N450 modulation effect.
This result lends further support for a critical role of glutamatergic neurotransmission in cognitive control in the DL task. Future studies should
investigate how neuromodulatory, electrophysiological and hemodynamic
correlates are related to each other and whether these associations are distorted in populations with cognitive control impairments.

E4
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF ATTENTION SWITCHING IN A DYNAMIC “COCKTAIL-PARTY” SCENARIO: EVIDENCE
OF OLDER AND YOUNGER ADULTS Stephan Getzmann1, Edmund
Wascher1, Michael Falkenstein1; 1Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, Ardeystr. 67, D-44139 Dortmund, Germany — Speech

understanding in complex listening environments requires (a) auditory
scene analysis, comprising auditory object formation and segregation, and
(b) allocation of the attentional focus to the speaker of interest. Changes in
the auditory scenario, e.g., in speaker settings in a multi-talker environment, require re-focusing of attention. Here, the cortical activity related to
attention switching was studied in a dynamic “cocktail-party” scenario in
22 older and 22 younger adults. A naturalistic “stock-price monitoring”
task was employed (Getzmann & Falkenstein, Brain Res 1415:8-22, 2011),
in which prices of listed companies were simultaneously recited by four
speakers at different locations in space. The participants had to respond to
the price of a target company, while ignoring all other companies. Target
speaker voice and position were kept constant for a number of trials and
then the speaker voice or position or both were occasionally changed. The
analysis of event-related potentials indicated a larger N1 and a delayed P2
in the older, than younger, group, and a larger N2 in the younger, than
older, group. In both age groups, changes in speaker setting resulted in
a decline in performance, and triggered a phasic negative response over
posterior parietal brain areas, peaking at about 440 ms after speech onset.
These results suggest age-related differences in allocation of attentional
resources and in inhibitory control, while neural correlates of attention
switching appeared to be equally effective in both age groups.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

147

Poster Session E

E5
RESTING-STATE ALPHA-BAND FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN
TINNITUS Carly Demopoulos1, Leighton Hinkley1, Danielle Mizuiri1, Coleman
Garrett1, Susanne Honma1, Anne Findlay1, Steven Cheung1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of California, San Francisco — Tinnitus is a common auditory

perceptual disorder whose neural substrates are under intense debate. Previous studies of individuals with tinnitus have identified abnormal resting
functional connectivity in brain regions associated with auditory processing, multisensory integration, attention, and emotional state. The goal of the
present study was to examine differences in MEG resting state functional
connectivity for participants with tinnitus compared to controls and to
identify associations between regional connectivity and functional impairment. Participants were 37 individuals ages 37-70, including 20 chronic
tinnitus subjects (Mean age=52.6, SD=10.83) and 17 control participants
(Mean age=53.99, SD=7.38). MEG scans were acquired using a 275-channel
whole head biomagnetometer during six minutes of rest (eyes closed) and
were co-registered to 3T T1 weighted MRIs for source space reconstruction.
Imaginary coherence analyses were performed on a 60 second artifact free
segment of the data to examine group differences in functional connectivity. Group contrasts in imaginary coherence identified increased connectivity (p<0.05, 10% adjusted FDR correction) for participants with tinnitus
bilaterally in the middle frontal gyrus, left inferior parietal lobule, and left
postcentral gyrus. Decreased connectivity was not identified for any region
in the tinnitus group. In sum, consistent with previous research, increased
connectivity in participants with tinnitus was detected in brain regions
associated with networks regulating attention and distress.

E6
QEEG OF PASSIVE MUSICAL PARADIGMS ASSAYS INTEGRATIVE
CEREBRAL FUNCTION IN THE MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS STATE
Brian C Fidali1, Mary M Conte1, Daniel J Thengone1, Tanya J Nauvel1, Nicholas D
Schiff1; 1Weill Cornell Medical College — Patients with disorders of conscious-

ness demonstrate reproducible but inconsistent responses to external stimuli, making it difficult to assess their residual capacity for cognition. Auditory paradigms such as command following or passive language listening
can assess the presence of these patients’ covert cognition or integrative
cerebral function, respectively, but their sensitivity is limited by receptive
language capacity. The use of musical stimuli overcomes this limitation
as music processing is more bilateral and, therefore, resilient to structural
brain injury in the language-dominant hemisphere. In pilot studies, minimally conscious state (MCS) patients have demonstrated differential qEEG
changes between familiar versus unfamiliar music. Here, we expand on
these findings and compare the diagnostic utility of passive music and language qEEG paradigms. 37-channel video EEG data were obtained from
16 MCS patients, who listened to familiar and unfamiliar music along
with an array of personally meaningful, comedic, and emotionally neutral
language stimuli. Thomson spectral estimates for each condition were calculated from artifact and movement-free 3 sec EEG epochs. Significance
was determined by the Two Group Test with 2 Hz resolution (alpha = .05).
Seven of 16 MCS patients demonstrated differential alpha frequency suppression to familiar versus unfamiliar music, consistent with a release of
attentional inhibition (Foxe & Snyder, 2011). Comparison of the patients’
qEEG responses among music and language conditions demonstrates the
robustness and relative sensitivity of familiar musical paradigms. Our findings support the use of passive musical paradigms to identify integrative
cerebral function and, perhaps, elements of covert cognition in disorders of
consciousness.

ATTENTION: Spatial
E7
THE WRITE BIAS: THE INFLUENCE OF NATIVE READING DIRECTION AND DYNAMIC STIMULI ON AESTHETIC PREFERENCE
BIASES Trista Friedrich1, Victoria Harms1, Lorin Elias1; 1University of Saskatchewan — Leftward asymmetries and preference biases are evident in visual
artwork. This leftward asymmetry is particularly prominent when examining populations whose native language reads from left-to-right (LtR).
However, examination of non-Western populations whose native language

148

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
is read from right-to-left (RtL) often demonstrates a weakening of the commonly observed leftward biases. Experiment 1 examined aesthetic preferences in native LtR and RtL readers. Experiment 2 examined Hindi (LtR)
and Urdu (RtL) readers to reduce the potential influence of confounding
cultural differences on aesthetic preference biases as these groups share
linguistic, cultural, and geographic similarities. We also investigated the
effects of dynamic movement on directionality preference. In both experiments participants viewed mirror-imaged pairs of mobile objects and
landscapes in both static and dynamic form, and judged which stimulus
was more aesthetically pleasing. RtL readers failed to show a preference
bias, whereas LtR readers preferred stimuli with LtR directionality regardless of the location of the mass. Native Hindi readers also demonstrated a
strong preference for stimuli with LtR directionality, whereas Urdu readers
failed to demonstrate a preference bias. Furthermore, the directional biases
observed by both sets of sample groups were accentuated by the dynamic
stimuli. This pattern of results provides evidence that the strength of aesthetic bias is influenced by both behavioural biases, such as scanning habits
developed from reading direction, and neural and anatomical asymmetries
in spatial attention mechanisms.

E8
STRUCTURAL VARIABILITY WITHIN FRONTOPARIETAL NETWORKS AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN ATTENTIONAL
FUNCTIONS CAPTURED BY BUNDESEN’S THEORY OF VISUAL
ATTENTION Magdalena Chechlacz1, Celine Gillebert1, Signe Vangkilde2,
Anders Petersen2, Glyn Humphreys1; 1University of Oxford, 2University of Copenhagen — Visuospatial attention allows us to select and act upon a subset

of behaviourally relevant visual stimuli while ignoring the rest. Bundesen’s Theory of Visual Attention (TVA) offers a quantitative analysis of the
different facets of attention within a unitary model and thus provides a
powerful analytic framework for understanding individual differences in
attentional functions. Visuospatial attention is contingent upon large neuronal networks, distributed across both hemispheres, consisting of several
cortical areas interconnected by long association frontoparietal pathways
including 3 separate branches of superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF I-III)
and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF). Here we examine whether
structural differences within frontoparietal networks mediate variability
in visual attention abilities as assessed by the TVA framework (processing
speed, visual short term memory capacity/VSTM, attentional weighting
between left and right visual field/spatial bias, minimum effective exposure duration, attentional weight of distractors). Structural measures were
based on spherical deconvolution and tractography derived indices of tract
volume and hindrance modulated orientation anisotropy (HMOA). We
report that individual differences in VSTM and processing speed are linked
to variability in the microstructure (HMOA index) of SLF II and SLF III
within the right hemisphere as well as hemispheric lateralization within
the IFOF. Moreover, we show that variability in spatial bias is mediated by
both individual differences in microstructure and volume of SLF II within
the right hemisphere. We conclude that individual differences in some
(VSTM, processing speed, spatial bias) but not all attentional functions, as
assessed by TVA, link to variability in structural organization within frontoparietal pathways.

E9
THE ROLE OF RIGHT MIDDLE FRONTAL GYRUS IN SWITCHING
BETWEEN EXOGENOUS AND ENDOGENOUS ATTENTION Kelsey A.
Holiday1, Shruti Japee1, Maureen Satyshur2, Ikuko Mukai3, Leslie G. Ungerleider1;
National Institute of Mental Health/National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, 2Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 3Laureate Institute of Brain Research, Tulsa, OK — To probe the contribution of
1

the right middle fontal gyrus (MFG) to endogenous (top-down, goal-directed) and exogenous (bottom-up, stimulus-driven) attention, we compared performance on an orientation discrimination task of a patient with
a right MFG resection to healthy controls. On endogenously cued trials, a
central cue predicted with 90% accuracy (i.e., valid vs. invalid) the location of a peri-threshold Gabor patch. On exogenously cued trials, a cue
appeared briefly at one of two peripheral locations, followed, after a variable inter-stimulus interval (ISI; range 0 to 700 ms), by a Gabor patch in
either the same (valid) or opposite (invalid) location. For both the patient

2015 Annual Meeting
and controls, valid cues facilitated faster reaction times compared to invalid
cues, on endogenous and short ISI exogenous trials. However, at longer ISI
exogenous trials, the patient performed poorly and had difficulty reorienting attention to top-down control after the effect of the exogenous cue had
dissipated, a conclusion supported by his improved performance on trials
that explicitly cued him during long ISIs to attend to both locations. The
results thus indicate a role of the right MFG in switching between exogenous and endogenous attention. Resting state fMRI data revealed that the
right superior parietal lobule and right orbitofrontal cortex showed significantly greater correlations with a left MFG seed region (a region tightly
coupled with the right MFG in controls) in the patient. This paradoxical
increase in cortical coupling may represent a compensatory mechanism in
the patient to offset the loss of function of the resected tissue.

E10
AUDITORY SPATIAL ATTENTION TO SPEECH AND COMPLEX NONSPEECH SOUNDS IN CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Laura Soskey1, Paul D. Allen1, Loisa Bennetto1; 1University of Rochester — One of the earliest observable social communication impairments in
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a failure to orient to speech and other
social stimuli. A key component of social orienting is the ability to focus
auditory perception on the specific location of a sound source. Social orienting deficits could also be driven by the increased acoustic complexity
of speech compared to nonsocial sounds. This study examined the effect
of acoustic complexity on auditory spatial attention in children with ASD
compared to matched neurotypical controls. Target and distractor sounds
were played randomly in quick succession from speakers in a free-field
array. Subjects attended to a central or peripheral location, and were
instructed to respond to target sounds at the attended location while ignoring sounds from adjacent locations. Stimulus-specific blocks evaluated
spatial attention for simple non-speech tones, speech sounds (vowels), and
complex non-speech sounds matched to vowels on key acoustic properties.
We found that children with ASD had significantly more diffuse auditory
spatial attention gradients compared to neurotypical children, indicated by
increased responding to sounds at adjacent non-target locations. Additionally, children with ASD had significantly more diffuse attention for speech
and complex non-speech, but not for simple sounds, which suggests that
acoustic complexity has a deleterious effect on their auditory spatial attention. Together, impairments in auditory spatial attention and processing
complex auditory stimuli may contribute to social orienting deficits and
other social communication impairments in individuals with ASD.

E11
SELECTIVE ATTENTION AND MEMORY: EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS AND THE IOR EFFECT Leigh Andrews1, Jacob MacDonald1, Julie
Markant2, Erika Nyhus1; 1Bowdoin College, 2Brown University — Visual learning is dependent on the focusing of the attentional system. Studies show
that attentional enhancement and suppression modify the encoding of
otherwise identically presented stimuli. fMRI shows that activation for the
attended stimulus is stronger with simultaneous suppression at the distractor location utilizing inhibition of return (IOR), in which an elongated cue
to target interval suppresses attention at the cued location and enhances
attention at the non-cued location. EEG research links the N1 component
to attentional enhancement that occurs early in IOR and the Nd250 component to excitatory processes that override IOR. The present study utilized
IOR to study the impact of target enhancement and distractor suppression
on memory encoding. In the task a cue appeared on the left or right 600
ms before participants responded to target images appearing in the cued
or non-cued location. Participants were not informed that the images used
would be the subject of a subsequent recognition memory test. EEG was
used to look for component differences between target enhancement and
distractor suppression during encoding. Subjects’ reaction times were marginally faster and memory was better for non-cued than cued targets. There
was an increased N1 and Nd250 for non-cued relative to cued targets and
an increased N1 for cued relative to non-cued distractors, which is consistent with N1 increases being associated with enhancement. These results
suggest that subjects’ memory is affected by selective attention during
encoding; attentional enhancement of targets and suppression of distractors improves memory encoding.

Poster Session E

E12
LEFTWARD PERCEPTUAL BIAS SURPASSES THE SNARC EFFECT
IN NON-SYMBOLIC NUMEROSITY COMPARISON PERFORMANCE Dasom Lee1, Joohyung Chun1, Soohyun Cho1; 1Chung-Ang University —
It is commonly believed that numbers are spatially represented. One wellknown example is the SNARC (Spatial-Numerical Association of Response
Codes) effect, in which small numbers are processed faster in the left and
large numbers in the right side of space. In the present study, we found that
nonsymbolic numerosity comparison was better when subjects chose the
more numerous dot array presented and responded to within the left side
of space compared to the right (the opposite of SNARC effect). Moreover,
this pattern persisted even when the analysis was restricted to the easily
discriminable ratios (in which the SNARC effect is more likely). This result
can be interpreted as the leftward perceptual bias being stronger than the
SNARC effect in the side-by-side format of nonsymbolic numerosity comparison. In addition, in the difficult ratio trials, such a leftward facilitation
effect was stronger for large compared to small set sizes. This result can
be interpreted as leftward attentional bias causing pseudo-neglect in the
right side of space leading to underestimation of the right-side array. Given
that underestimation increases for large set sizes, performance would benefit more on those trials. Interestingly, symbolic numerosity comparison
was better when subjects chose the larger Arabic numeral presented and
responded to within the right compared to the left space. Overall, our
findings suggest that mental representations of nonsymbolic and symbolic
magnitude may differ in their spatial organization.

E13
LARGE-SCALE SYNCHRONY IN ALPHA AND GAMMA BANDS
UNDERLIES ATTENTION TO MULTIPLE VISUAL OBJECTS Santeri
Rouhinen1, J Matias Palva1, Satu Palva1; 1University of Helsinki — We investi-

gated the systems-level neuronal mechanisms of visual multi-object attention by using magneto- and electroencephalography (M/EEG) and datadriven analysis of inter-areal phase synchronization. M/EEG was recorded
from nineteen healthy subjects who performed two visual multi-object
tracking tasks with semi-naturally moving objects; one with 1-4 target
objects and another with the same targets together with distracters. The
subjects tracked the target objects and responded whenever they observed
a 100 ms lasting target event that was a change in object shape. MaxFilter
and independent component analysis were used to suppress extra-cranial
noise and to remove ocular and heart-beat-related components from data.
Anatomical magnetic-resonance images were automatically segmented
with Freesurfer for individual grey matter surface reconstruction and
neuro-anatomical labeling used to create fixed-orientation, cortically constrained surface source models for minimum-norm-estimate based source
reconstruction of Morlet-wavelet filtered M/EEG data. Source time series
were collapsed into cortical parcels and large-scale phase synchronization
was then quantified between the cortical parcels. In both tasks in a 0.5 s pretarget-event time window, synchronization in the high alpha (10-15 Hz)
band was stronger for the subsequently detected than for the missed target
events and observed in fronto-parietal (FP) and dorsal attention networks
(DAN). Synchronization was also positively correlated with the number
of attended objects in alpha, beta (14-30 Hz), and gamma (40-120 Hz) frequency band. Subjects with low and high attentional capacities had distinct spectral and anatomical patterns of load-dependent synchronization.
Large-scale synchronization in FP and DAN is hence functionally significant for attention to multiple concurrent visual objects.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
E14
TOUCHY FEELY: THE INFLUENCE OF AFFECT ON SOMATOSENSORY POTENTIALS Michiel Spapé1,3, Imtiaj Ahmed1,2, Ville Harjunen1,3,
Giulio Jacucci1,2, Niklas Ravaja1,3; 1Helsinki Institute for Information Technology
HIIT, 2University of Helsinki, 3Aalto University — People commonly communi-

cate feelings using touch, and much research has been devoted to the question of how interpersonal haptics affect attention, memory, emotion and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

149

Poster Session E
decision making. Psychophysiological research has, for instance, shown
that a simple touch can enhance processing of emotional stimuli. However,
few studies have explicitly focused on tactile processing itself and investigated whether affect has an influence on how we perceive a touch. Since
interpersonal touch generally occurs within an affective context, this gap in
our understanding is particularly problematic. To address the problem, we
investigated the degree to which motivational and emotional cues determine the perception and processing of simple tactile stimuli. Two ERP studies were conducted in which the effects of a systematically varied affective
context on subsequent somatosensory evoked potentials were measured.
In Experiment 1, this context involved a symbolic monetary stimulus presented by a (fictional) other person, who subsequently delivered a remote
vibrotactile signal. In the second experiment, the context involved a natural
expression emoted by a 3-D avatar, presented in virtual reality, who subsequently reached out and initiated a tactile signal via a haptic glove. Each
experiment showed that affective information modulates tactile processing, particularly in the later components, at ca.250-500 ms post-stimulus.
Additionally, we investigated the differences and similarities between the
abstract, symbolic communication in the first experiment and the naturally
occurring touch in the second.

E15
COGNITIVE- VERSUS EMOTION-BASED INVOLUNTARY COGNITIONS: FRONTAL CONTROL AND HABITUATION EFFECTS Hyein
Cho1, Sabrina Bhangal1, Allison K. Allen1, Pareezad Zarolia2, Ezequiel Morsella1,3;
San Francisco State University, 2University of Denver, 3University of California,
San Francisco — Neural processes can engender voluntary and involuntary
1

conscious contents (e.g., an unintended, spontaneous thought). Interestingly, some contents are more likely to arise involuntarily than others. To
examine this, we used a paradigm that builds on the classic research by
Wegner revealing that, when instructed to suppress a conscious content,
one is then more likely to experience it involuntarily. We investigated
the contrast between cognitive- and emotion-based involuntary contents.
(The latter are usually ‘encapsulated.’) After being trained to perform a
word-manipulation task similar to Pig Latin (e.g., “CAR” becomes “ARCAY”), participants (n = 19) were instructed to not transform stimulus
words in this way. In a comparison condition, participants were presented
with emotion words and instructed to not feel the corresponding emotion.
Involuntary conscious contents arose more frequently (trial proportion) for
the language task (M = .50, SE = .05) than the emotion task (M = .29, SE =
.05), t(18) = 3.49, p = .003, even though the former involved complex symbol
manipulations associated with frontal cortex. Neuroimaging technologies
could elucidate these task-related neural processes. In a follow-up experiment, we examined whether these effects can be diminished, not through
intentions, but through habituation. Participants (n = 14) were shown 40
images of well-known objects and were instructed to not think of the object
names. Each object was presented (4 s) across ten consecutive trials, in
order to induce habituation. These new, robust paradigms are amenable
to neuroimaging technologies capable of identifying the contrasts between
voluntary and involuntary brain processes.

E16
VOCAL DISGUST MODULATES SOCIO-EMOTIONAL JUDGMENTS:
BEHAVIORAL AND ERP EVIDENCE Kathrin Rothermich1,2, Zachary
Shulman1, Marc D. Pell1,2; 1McGill University, Faculty of Medicine, School of
Communication Sciences and Disorders, Montreal, Canada, 2McGill Centre for
Research on Brain, Language and Music (CRBLM), Montreal, Canada — Disgust

is defined as a basic and universal emotion, consistent in its role in defending individuals against infection and disease. Over time, however, disgust
has evolved to include a social and moral domain, and it has been shown
that i.e. disgusting odor is able to influence social behavior (McGlone et
al., 2013). The current study examines whether auditory signals of disgust
(i.e., speech-embedded emotions, vocalizations) can bias socio-emotional
evaluations of visual traits involved in person perception, when compared
to cognitive judgments. We therefore used event-related potentials (ERPs)
to test whether speech induced feelings of disgust can cross-modally influence a person’s judgment of another person’s physical attractiveness. Furthermore, we investigated what type of information is driving the effect,
namely prosodic intonation or vocalizations. Participants listened to disgusting, happy, and neutral vocalizations or pseudo-utterances and were

150

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
subsequently presented with a face and forced to make either an emotional
(i.e. attractiveness) or cognitive (i.e. age) judgment. The results show that
emotional primes bias the evaluation of the faces when subjects make
socio-emotional judgments, but not on socio-cognitive judgments. This
effect is visible in the behavioral data as well as in both early (N1 and P2)
and late (LPC) ERP components. Furthermore, depending on the emotion
we find different effects for vocalizations versus pseudo-utterances. Our
findings show that vocal emotions are indeed capable of altering social
behavior, and we will discuss our results in the light of current approach
and withdrawal theories of human emotions.

E17
THE POWER OF COMPETITION: EFFECTS OF SOCIAL MOTIVATION ON LEARNING Brynne DiMenichi1, Elizabeth Tricomi1; 1Rutgers University, Newark — Social motivation has been defined as a drive for a particular

goal based on a social influence (Hoggs & Abrams, 1990). Recently, social
motivation’s effect on learning has been examined in the form of competition (Wentzel, 1999). In our fMRI experiment, 20 participants completed
a learning task in which they were rewarded for remembering an overall
average in the Self condition, or “beating” another “participant”--a samesex confederate—in the Competition condition. Behaviorally, we found
that participants remembered significantly more shapes during the task
and later recalled more shapes learned while not competing. We also found
that during working memory maintenance, in the Self condition, there was
greater activation in the medial orbital frontal cortex, bilaterally in the temporal cortex, and bilaterally in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC)
in comparison to the Competition condition. While competing, there was
greater activation in the thalamus and cerebellum, as well as the motor
cortex. Furthermore, during feedback while competing, there was greater
activation in the dlPFC, posterior cingulate, occipital lobe, and medial prefrontal cortex. Our results suggest that receiving feedback regarding competition produces more activation in brain regions previously implicated in
social interaction (Zaki et. al, 2009) and competition (LeBouc & Pessiglione,
2013). However, individuals performed more accurately on the memory
task in absence of competition, while also showing performance-related
activation (Hare et al., 2010; Chein & Schneider, 2005).

E18
EMOTIONAL TASK-RELEVANCE IN COGNITIVE AND EMOTIONAL
CONFLICT PROCESSING Artyom Zinchenko1,2, Philipp Kanske2, Christian
Obermeier2, Erich Schröger3, Sonja Kotz2,4; 1International Max Planck Research
School on Neuroscience of Communication (IMPRS NeuroCom), 2Max Planck
Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 3University of Leipzig, 4University of Manchester — Successful communication often requires processing of

conflicting emotional information conveyed by the face and the voice (irony,
satire). Emotional stimuli have been shown to speed up cognitive conflict
processing, when they are task-relevant. It is unclear, however, what role
task-relevance plays for emotional stimuli in emotional conflict processing.
In two EEG Experiments we compared the influence of task-relevance of
emotional stimuli in cognitive and emotional conflict processing. In order
to maximally approximate real-life processes and to elicit robust neural
responses, we used multisensory stimuli. Participants either categorized
spoken vowels (‘A’ and ‘O’, cognitive conflict) or their emotional valence
(emotional conflict), irrespective of congruence with visual information.
The results revealed that emotion facilitates both cognitive and emotional
conflict processing, as reflected in a reduced RT conflict effect for emotional
relative to neutral trials. In contrast, we observed a conflict-specific reversal of the N100 response in the event-related potentials: the conflict effect
was enhanced for emotional compared to neutral trials in cognitive conflict
and reduced in emotional conflict. Additionally, domain-general conflict
effects were observed in the P200 and the N200 responses. Emotional stimuli attract attention and facilitate conflict processing. However, neuropsychological mechanisms underlying facilitation of cognitive and emotional
conflict processing may differ.

2015 Annual Meeting

E19
FACIAL FEATURES THAT SIGNAL TRANSIENT EMOTIONAL STATES,
BUT NOT ENDURING PERSONALITY TRAITS, MODULATE AUTOMATIC IMITATION Emily Butler1, Robert Ward1, Richard Ramsey1; 1Bangor
University — Facial signals and automatic imitation are key social cues that
guide behaviour. Indeed, facial signals convey what someone thinks, feels
and desires, whereas imitation increases rapport and affiliation between
interacting individuals. However, it is currently unclear, how facial signals influence automatic imitation. The current project investigated the
hypothesis that specific facial signals would enhance automatic imitation.
To test this hypothesis, we paired different types of facial cue with an automatic imitation task. We manipulated facial expressions to signal different
emotional states and invariant facial features to signal trait characteristics.
Across four behavioural experiments, we show a dissociation between the
influence of state and trait signals. In the first two experiments, participants viewed composite images of faces based on self-reported agreeableness. These stimuli portrayed invariant trait features, which signalled high
agreeableness, low agreeableness or were neutral. Despite readily identifying trait-based facial signals, levels of agreeableness did not differentially
modulate automatic imitation. In experiment three and four, participants
viewed expressive faces (smiling, frowning and neutral). Emotional expressions modulated automatic imitation, such that imitation was greater following presentation of smiling and frowning faces compared to neutral.
Overall, these data suggest that imitative tendencies are more sensitive
to transient changes in others’ emotional states than trait-based character
judgments. Moreover, we provide initial links between cognitive systems
that extract facial signals and those that regulate interactions between individuals. Future work may use this paradigm to understand the nature of
difficulties in Autism Spectrum Disorder as they have reported difficulties
in face perception and imitation tasks.

E20
FACTORS RELATED TO EMPATHY IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO
PEOPLE Kyohei Oomon1, Shu Morioka1; 1Department of Neurorehabilitation,
Graduate School of Health Science, Kio University — It has been reported
that the therapist’s empathy during rehabilitation has a positive effect on
patients. However, factors related to empathy in a dialogue between two
people remains unclear. The purpose of this study was to examine factors
related to empathy in a dialogue between two people. Participants were
recruited from the general population, and 16 pairs of the same-sex participants engaged in a dialogue meeting. The topic of dialogue was “an
important aim in life,” and the dialogue lasted for 5 minutes. We conducted
the evaluation with an empathy coping scale, the Inclusion of Other in the
Self scale(IOS),individual factors measured after the dialogue, synchrony of
body movements based on video animation analysis during the dialogue,
impression of others, and self-mood before the dialogue. Spearman’s rank
correlation coefficients were calculated for the relationship between each
variable and empathy coping scores, and multiple regression analysis was
employed with empathy coping scale score as the criterion variable. Only
synchrony of body movements had a significant effect on empathy coping
(p < .05, R2 = .41). Thus, Synchrony of body movements with others is necessary for empathy in dialogues between two people.

E21
SELF AS SENSOR: IDENTIFYING NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS OF OTHERS’ TRUSTWORTHINESS Adam Russell1, Ruthanna
Gordon1; 1Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity — Judging the
trustworthiness of new potential partners is a vital social cognition process. However, little is known about the neurophysiological basis of such
judgments, particularly as it accurately reflects the actual benevolence,
integrity, and competence of others. In a series of studies, the Tools for
Recognizing Useful Signals of Trustworthiness (TRUST) Program explored
whether and how one’s own neural, physiological, and behavioral signals
reflect another’s trustworthiness. All studies used variations on a standard
“trust game” design, in which one participant in a dyadic task must choose
whether to trust the other with monetary stakes, and the second participant
must choose whether to act in a manner worthy of that trust. Experimenters
measured EEG, skin conductance, heart rate, and hormone levels, as well
as collecting data on decisions made and reaction times. There were four

Poster Session E
protocols, three of which were replicated across two labs each. Preliminary
analyses suggested that skin conductance, heart rate, and EEG might offer
signals reflecting others’ trustworthiness. However, results were inconsistent and many possible avenues of analysis remained open. A follow-up
challenge contest made de-identified data from 2 protocols publicly available, offering prizes for the best analysis. The winning solution demonstrates that heart rate and reaction time signals strongly reflect a partner’s
decision to act in a trustworthy or untrustworthy fashion, but not their ability to do so. This poster discusses two of the TRUST protocols in depth,
explores methodological issues with the hormonal assays, and presents
results from the challenge’s winning algorithm developers.

E22
ATTENTIONAL ORIENTING TO SOCIAL THREAT CUES UNDERMINES FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING IN FEMALES WITH HIGH
SENSITIVITY TO INTERPERSONAL REJECTION Christopher Crew1, Geraldine Downey1, Olta Hoxha2, Jennifer Mangels2; 1Columbia University, 2Baruch
College - City University of New York — Building on previous work on academic

achievement and Rejection Sensitivity (RS), we ask whether High RS (HRS)
compromises the ability to use negative performance feedback as an effective learning opportunity. If so, is the liability of HRS greater when the
feedback occurs in a social context and what is the underlying mechanism?
To address these questions, event-related potentials were recorded while
participants answered general knowledge questions followed by immediate performance feedback and the correct answer. Error correction was
measured with a surprise retest 24-48 hours later. Accuracy feedback was
either social (e.g., incorrect: disappointed male face) or nonsocial (e.g., incorrect: red asterisk). HRS predicted poorer error correction following social
feedback, but only in females. To understand these behavioral effects, we
examined the P3a (300-450ms), an orienting response elicited by the performance feedback, and a set of negative-going waveforms over inferior temporal regions (400-800ms) associated with encoding of the correct answer.
Although the P3a was generally larger for correct than incorrect responses,
consistent with positive feedback being rarer (~35% of responses) and
more salient, HRS females showed a larger P3a to social feedback that was
incorrect compared to correct. A path analysis suggested that HRS females’
P3a response to social feedback was related to diminished retrieval success
by reducing engagement with corrective feedback (not true for males following social feedback or anyone following non-social feedback). Results
parallel research on (under)achievement in HRS females. Poor encoding of
learning opportunities in performance-evaluative situations may result in
diminished self-efficacy and may perpetuate RS.

E23
MORAL PRIMING IN VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL LESION
PATIENTS—A PROCESS DISSOCIATION APPROACH Justin Reber1,
Daryl Cameron1, Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Convergent research

from neuroimaging and the lesion method has identified the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) as an area of the brain critical to moral
judgment and behavior. It remains uncertain, however, which aspects of
vmPFC damage—emotional blunting and lack of autonomic reactivity
or impulsivity and lack of executive control—is driving the changes in
moral judgment and behavior seen in vmPFC lesion patients. This study
used a process-dissociation paradigm (Jacoby, 1991) to examine the relative contributions of both automatic and controlled processes to vmPFC
lesion patients’ response patterns on a moral priming task. Neurological
patients with focal lesions involving the vmPFC showed both higher rates
of automatic moral judgment and lower rates of controlled moral judgment
than demographically-matched comparison participants across both congruent and incongruent prime types. The lesion patients also had a higher
tendency than comparisons to moralize nonmoral words of both negative
and neutral valences. These findings suggest that vmPFC lesion patients’
relative impulsivity and lack of control, and not just their affective dysregulation and lowered autonomic reactivity, may contribute more to their
abnormal patterns of moral judgments than previously thought.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

151

Poster Session E

E24
THE EFFECTS OF OXYTOCIN ON PREFERRED INTERPERSONAL
SPACE: A PHARMACOLOGICAL NEUROIMAGING STUDY Daniela
Cohen1, Anat Perry1, Gadi Gilam2,3, Naama Mayseless1, Talma Hendler2,3, Simone
Shamay-Tsoory1; 1University of Haifa, 2Sagol School Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, 3Functional Brain Center, Wohl Institute for Advanced Imaging, Tel Aviv
Sourasky MedicalCenter — Background: Interpersonal distance, a space two

people share, creates and defines the dynamics of social interactions. Considering that oxytocin (OT) plays a key role in social behavior, it has been
recently suggested that it mainly increases the salience of social agent.
Based on this hypothesis, the current study examined if the administration of OT would have a differential effect on the preferred space between
friends and strangers. We hypothesized that two systems mediate interpersonal distance preference, the social cognition system (prefrontal cortex)
and the threat system (amygdala) and that these networks would be modulated by OT administration. Methods: In a double blind, within-subject
crossover design, 19 subjects were scanned, while performing an interpersonal distance task following the administration of either placebo or OT.
The task involved watching different protagonists (a friend or a stranger)
approaching the participant, and stopping them when feeling uncomfortable (CID task). Results: Behavioral results demonstrated that the friend
was stopped at the closest distance, and stranger at the furthest distance.
The fMRI results show an interaction between the effects of OT upon the
different protagonists. The right amygdala, parahippocampal gyrs, anterior
and posterior cingulate, and the left medial prefrontal cortex (BA9), were
found to be more active following the administration of OT. Conclusions:
The findings suggest that OT affects the activity of brain networks related
to social cognition and threat. It is concluded that OT, which enhances the
salience of social agents, modulates interpersonal distance between individuals depending on the relationship with the protagonist.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
E25
DEVELOPMENTAL PROSOPAGNOSIA (DP) IS BEST EXPLAINED
AS A DEFICIT IN DETECTING FACIAL DISTINCTIVENESS: THE
DISTINCTIVENESS HYPOTHESIS OF DP. Edwin Burns1, Jeremy Tree1,
Christoph Weidemann1; 1Swansea University — Developmental prosopagnosia

(DP) is a face perception disorder characterized by an inability to recognize faces. Some investigators have suggested that DP is best explained
as an impairment of holistic face processing, however, research evidence
has yielded mixed results. In a recent paper (Burns, Tree & Weidemann,
2014) we hypothesized that DP might actually be better described as an
impairment at detecting facial distinctiveness. We decided to run two
ERP experiments testing this hypothesis. Previous research has identified
the N250 ERP component as being modulated by differing levels of facial
distinctiveness. In one study, we showed faces that had been morphed to
different degrees of distinctiveness to control and DP participants while
recording electrophysiological data. Individuals with intact face processing skills exhibited the expected differential N250 responses to the different levels of distinctive faces. In contrast, those with DP showed no such
differences between the different face types. In a second experiment, we
recorded electrophysiological data as control and DP participants learned a
specific face across a recognition memory paradigm. While the control participants developed an N250 response to this face in comparison to novel
distractors rapidly, those with DP required more exposures to a face before
developing a similar response; this finding was consistent with previous
research suggesting that distinctive faces elicit a larger N250 response more
rapidly than faces lacking in distinctiveness. Taken together, these findings
provide strong evidence that DP is best explained as a deficit in detecting
facial distinctiveness.

E26
EEG CORRELATES OF IMPAIRED SELF-OTHER INTEGRATION
DURING JOINT TASK PERFORMANCE IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Javier
de la Asuncion1, Manuel Morrens1, Bernard Sabbe1, Ellen R. A. de Bruijn1,2; 1University of Antwerp, Belgium, 2Leiden University, The Netherlands — Deficits in a

152

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
wide variety of social cognitive processes are well established in schizophrenia. However, research focusing on actual interacting individuals is
surprisingly scarce. Problems in low-level processes such as self-other
integration may importantly underlie often-reported higher-level deficits.
The current study aimed at measuring possible disturbances in self-other
integration in schizophrenia using both behavioral and ERP (event-related
potential) measures. Sixteen healthy controls and fifteen schizophrenia
patients performed a social Simon task in both a joint and an individual
setting. Behaviorally, patients showed general slower reaction times, but
comparable self-other integration as reflected in the social Simon effect.
The ERP results for the healthy controls revealed increased no-go P3 amplitudes in the joint compared to the individual setting. Crucially, patients
did not show this increase in no-go P3 amplitude. In line with previous
research, the present ERP findings demonstrate that healthy volunteers
needed more effort to inhibit their responses in the joint compared to the
individual setting. Patients however, showed altered self-other integration
when they had to withhold their responses while their co-actor had to act.
These outcomes indicate that schizophrenia patients have deficits in lowlevel processes required for successful joint action.

E27
THE IMPACT OF EXPERIENCE ON IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT AFFECTIVE RESPONSES DURING ACTION OBSERVATION Louise Kirsch1,
Arielle Snagg2, Erin Heerey1, Emily Cross1,3; 1Bangor University, Bangor, UK,
2
Pomona College, Claremont, California, USA, 3Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands — Perceiving others in action elicits explicit and

implicit affective responses in observers. In the present study, we examined how these responses relate to observers’ familiarity with the observed
movements. We recorded facial electromyographic (EMG) responses in
experienced dancers and non-dancers as they watched short videos of
movements performed by professional dancers. Responses were recorded
from the corrugator supercilii and zygomaticus major muscles, both of
which have been shown to be engaged during observation of affect-evoking
stimuli. In the first part of the experiment, participants passively watched
the videos. In the second part, they explicitly rated how much they liked
watching each movement. We found different patterns of EMG responses
among dancers and non–dancers, such that participants’ explicit affective
judgements of the movements were related to facial muscle activation (a
measure of implicit affective judgement) only if they were generally familiar with the movement. These findings advance our understanding of how
the expression of affective responses when watching others in action. The
findings have implications for the role of emotional valence during action
perception engagement, as well as the psychology of art perception.

E28
USING GAZE STRATEGIES TO OPTIMIZE INFORMATION IN SOCIAL
DECISION-MAKING Nida Latif1, Mashal K. Haque1, Monica S. Castelhano1,
K.G. Munhall1; 1Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada — Our ability to

make quick social decisions during everyday interactions is vital to effective
communication. However, in social situations, we have access to an abundance of information and the cognitive challenge to rapidly select optimal
strategies to gather information necessary for the social decision-making
process. In the present study, we investigated how manipulating availability of information influences observers’ decisions and the gaze strategies selected to make affiliation judgment (friends vs. strangers) for silent
videos of two interacting individuals. We demonstrated that eliminating
information (full-body vs. head-only cues) resulted in a reduced ability to
distinguish friends from strangers and the use of different eye-movement
strategies to perform the same social task. Observers made more fixations
towards the talkers’ eyes than other locations in both conditions. However, when information was restricted to a head-only view, participants
switched their gaze between eyes and mouth more frequently than with
full information. Further, availability of full-body cues resulted in observers switching gaze between talkers more frequently to discriminate friends
from strangers. When examining how gaze strategy predicts overall accuracy of a social decision given full-body information, we demonstrated that
individuals who spent more time fixating on the mouth were likely to be
more accurate in affiliation discrimination. These results demonstrate that
observers select gaze strategies to optimize all available information and

2015 Annual Meeting
that greater optimization predicts increased accuracy of our decisions. We
further conclude that human social abilities rely on versatile decision-making strategies to handle the complexity of our social world.

E29
TRANSCRANIAL RANDOM NOISE STIMULATION AND COGNITIVE
TRAINING IMPROVES FACE PERCEPTION Rachel Bennetts1, Sarah
Bate1, Tegan Penton2, Carmen Kohl2, Michael Banissy2; 1Bournemouth University,
Goldsmiths, University of London — Several studies have found that cognitive

2

training can improve face recognition. However, the effects tend to be relatively small and short-lived. Recent research has found that non-invasive
brain stimulation techniques such as transcranial random noise stimulation
(tRNS) can enhance and extend the effects of cognitive training in other
domains, but this has not been examined for face recognition. In this study,
we examined whether tRNS modulated the effects of a face recognition
training program in people with typical face recognition abilities. Participants completed a face discrimination training task for one hour per day
over five days. Training was preceded by twenty minutes of active high
frequency tRNS or sham stimulation to lateral occipitotemporal cortices.
Participants completed a battery of face processing tasks assessing face
memory (the Cambridge Face Memory Test, CFMT), face perception (the
Cambridge Face Perception Test, CFPT), and patterns of eye-movements to
faces (free-viewing of faces and social scenes); these took place before training, after training, and at a one-week follow-up session. Participants who
received active stimulation showed significant improvement on the CFPT
following training, whereas those who received sham stimulation did not
show any training gains. There was no improvement for inverted faces, and
neither the active or sham stimulation group showed an improvement on
the CFMT, or any change in eye-movement patterns. These results suggest
that tRNS can enhance the effectiveness of face recognition training programmes, but further work is needed to establish whether perceptual gains
can be generalised to memory.

E30
AN FMRI STUDY ON THE INFLUENCE OF BEING IMITATED ON
EMPATHY FOR PAIN Lize De Coster1, Charlotte Desmet1, Jelle Demanet1,
Liesbet Goubert1, Marcel Brass1; 1Ghent University — Being imitated has been

shown to have several positive social consequences. In a recent study,
it was shown that being imitated does not only affect complex social
behaviour, but that it influences a basic process such as empathy for pain as
well. Empathy for pain refers to the idea that pain-related brain activation
is found when observing someone else in pain. In a paradigm designed to
investigate the influence of being imitated on empathy for pain, participants’ finger movements are being imitated by a hand on screen or not.
Subsequently, the hand on screen receives painful stimulation. In the current fMRI study, brain activation was measured to investigate which brain
areas related to pain observation are modulated by being imitated. Furthemore, it was explored whether neural evidence was found for the idea
that self-other overlap underlies this effect. Peak activity was found in the
right dorsal anterior insula (AI), supporting the idea that being imitated
enhances activation in pain-related brain areas. Interestingly, this region
has been related to translation of affective states into action tendencies.
Furthermore, activation was found in the right temporo-parietal junction
(TPJ), a region associated with self-other distinction. This activity was positively correlated with activation in the AI, indicating that stronger affective
responding was associated with a greater need for distinction between self
and other. These results provided the first direct evidence for the idea that
being imitated modulates empathy for pain, and support a shared representational account.

E31
LINKING PERSON PERCEPTION AND PERSON KNOWLEDGE IN
THE HUMAN BRAIN Inez Greven1, Paul Downing1, Richard Ramsey1; 1Bangor
University — To date, neuroscience research has examined separately how
we detect human agents in the environment (person perception) and how
we reason about their thoughts, traits or intentions (person knowledge).
Occipitotemporal cortices and fusiform gyri have been associated with
person perception, whereas medial prefrontal cortex, temporoparietal
junction and temporal poles have been associated with person knowledge.
However, it remains unknown how multiple features of a person (e.g., thin

Poster Session E
and kind) are linked to form a holistic understanding of identity. In this
functional imaging experiment, we investigated the hypothesis that when
encountering another person, specialised circuits for person perception
would be functionally coupled with those involved in person knowledge.
In a factorial design, we paired bodies or names with traits or neutral statements and independent localiser scans identified networks associated with
body perception and mental state reasoning. When observing a body paired
with a trait-implying statement, person perception and person knowledge
networks were preferentially engaged. In addition, functional connectivity analyses demonstrated that a region of right fusiform gyrus was functionally coupled with bilateral TPJ and right temporal pole. These results
demonstrate that brain circuits for representing another person’s physical
appearance, such as body shape and posture, are linked to brain circuits
that are engaged when reasoning about another person’s trait-based character, such as whether they are friendly, helpful or generous. These data
support the view that a “who” system for social cognition spans perceptual
and inferential mechanisms and that these mechanisms communicate to
each other when forming a representation of another’s identity.

E32
SOUND FREQUENCY AFFECTS SPEECH EMOTION PERCEPTION:
RESULTS FROM CONGENITAL AMUSIA Sydney L. Lolli1, Ari Lewenstein1,
Sean Winnik1, Julian Basurto1, Psyche Loui1; 1Wesleyan University — Congeni-

tal amusia is a neurodevelopmental disorder of pitch perception and production. While amusia has clear effects on musical perception, its impact
is on speech perception is less clear. Our study investigates the effects of
amusia on perceiving emotional prosody in speech. It has been suggested
that amusics may rely more on alternative cues within speech to infer emotional content, such as stress and emphasis, to compensate for poor pitch
perception. We constructed low-pass-filtered conditions of the Macquarie
Battery for Evaluation of Prosody to disrupt intelligibility of emotional
speech while preserving melodic contour. Thirty-seven subjects performed
an emotional identification task of 84 MBEP speech samples under both
low-pass and natural speech conditions, as well as a psychophysical pitch
discrimination task. Results showed a significant correlation between pitch
discrimination threshold and accuracy in emotional identification for lowpass-filtered speech (r=-.389, p<0.05). In contrast, emotional identification
was not significantly correlated with pitch perception ability under natural
speech conditions (r=-.039, p>0.05). Given the different results in low-passfiltered and natural speech conditions, we inferred that amusics may be
compensating for poorer pitch perception by using speech cues that are
filtered out in the low-pass-filtered manipulation. To assess this potential
compensation, a second experiment is being conducted using high-passfiltered speech samples intended to isolate non-pitch cues. Results show no
significant correlation between pitch discrimination and emotional identification accuracy for high-pass-filtered speech (r=.346, p>0.05). Results from
these experiments suggest an influence of low frequency information in
identifying emotional content of speech.

E33
HIGH FREQUENCY TRANSCRANIAL RANDOM NOISE STIMULATION TO VENTROLATERAL PREFRONTAL CORTICES ENHANCES
EMOTION DISCRIMINATION ABILITIES Tegan Penton1, Lauren Evans1,
Michael Banissy1,2; 1Goldsmiths, University of London, New Cross, London,
SE14 6NW, 2University College London, 17 Queen Square, London, WCIN 3AR,
UK — Reductions in emotion perception abilities contribute to deficits in
communication and social competence, reduced quality of life, and social
isolation. Given this, techniques that enhance this ability could be valuable.
Transcranial Random Noise Stimulation (tRNS) is a form of non-invasive
electrical brain stimulation that increases cortical excitability and has been
used to enhance performance on various cognitive tasks. As yet, the effect
of tRNS on emotion perception has not been studied. Here, we conducted
two experiments to examine the effects of tRNS to bilateral Ventrolateral
Prefrontal Cortices (VLPFC) on emotion recognition and perception abilities, with the prediction that tRNS would improve these processes. Experiment 1 investigated the effects of tRNS to VLPFC relative to V5/MT on
emotion and identity discrimination using a same/different judgement
task at baseline and following stimulation. Participants showed a greater
improvement in performance following tRNS to VLPFC relative to V5/MT.
To examine this further, we conducted a second study to investigate the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

153

Poster Session E
effects of active tRNS relative to sham tRNS targeted at VLPFC on the Cambridge Face Perception Happiness (CFPT-Happy), Cambridge Face Perception Anger (CFPT-Angry), and Cambridge Face Perception Identity, Test
(CFPT-Identity). Participants receiving tRNS to VLPFC significantly outperformed those receiving sham stimulation on CFPT-Happy, but showed
no differences on either the CFPT-Angry or CFPT-Identity. Collectively,
these findings demonstrate that tRNS to VLPFC results in site and task specific enhancements in emotion discrimination, and imply that tRNS may be
a useful tool to facilitate emotion discrimination abilities.

E34
TO SEE OR NOT TO SEE – BRAIN ACTIVATION TO BRIEFLY PRESENTED FEARFUL FACES Paula Neumeister1, Carina Yvonne Heitmann1,
Katharina Feldker1, Thomas Straube1; 1Institute of Medical Psychology and Systems Neuroscience, University of Muenster — Fearful faces have repeatedly
been shown to activate a distributed network of cortical regions. However,
it is a matter of debate to what extent fearful faces can be processed without
conscious awareness during backward masking. In the present study, we
used event-related functional imaging (fMRI) to investigate brain activation
to very briefly presented (17 ms) fearful vs. neutral faces during two backward masking conditions (with and without 200 ms gap between target and
mask) with scrambled faces serving as masks. After each trial, participants
indicated by button press whether they had seen a face or not. Faces were
perceived in the supraliminal condition but not in the subliminal condition,
as revealed by signal detection theory analysis. Imaging results showed a
main effect of facial expression across awareness conditions in the right
superior temporal sulcus due to increased activation to fearful as compared
to neutral faces regardless of whether faces were detected or not. This result
shows critical involvement of the dorsal visual face processing stream, particularly the posterior STS, during automatic processing of facial emotion.
Furthermore, the present results provide evidence for cortical processing of
unseen fearful faces which have not been consciously perceived.

E35
LEARNING GROUP MEMBERSHIP: AN ERP EXAMINATION OF
EARLY VISUAL PROCESSING OF IN-GROUP AND OUT-GROUP
MEMBERSHIP DURING TRAINING Holly Earls1, Tim Curran1; 1University
of Colorado Boulder — It is well known that people are better at recognizing
faces of their own race relative to other-race faces (Meissner & Brigham,
2001). Although it was originally proposed that this recognition bias was
purely due to greater experience with own-race faces, more recent evidence
has shown an in-group recognition bias for arbitrary groups even when
prior exposure is equated (e.g. Bernstein, Young & Hugenberg, 2007). In
the current experiment, electroencephalography (EEG) was used to measure event-related potentials (ERPs) while participants view own- and
other-race faces of arbitrarily assigned in-group and out-group members.
ERPs were measured from initial exposure of the faces through each of
five runs of learning group membership. Results suggest that very little
exposure to in-group faces is needed before neural activation discrepancies
between groups are detected. Additionally, results indicate that although
learning team membership impacts face processing, early visual effects of
race are still present.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
E36
FOOD-CUE INHIBITORY TRAINING REDUCES REWARD REACTIVITY AND EATING URGES Pin-Hao A. Chen1, Richard B. Lopez1, William M.
Kelley1, Mary DiGeronimo1, Todd F. Heatherton1; 1Dartmouth College — The cur-

rent study compares the effectiveness of two types of training designed
to reduce food-cue reactivity in brain reward regions and eating urges
during daily living. According to the strength model of self-regulation,
successful self-regulation relies on a domain-general resource. Further, this
model suggests that training in one domain may transfer to other domains,
but most studies have failed to find any evidence for transfer effects. It is
therefore possible that domain-specific training may be more effective for
reducing food-cue reactivity as well as eating urges in daily life. Thus, in

154

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
this study, two weeks of domain-general (mindfulness) or domain-specific
(food-cue inhibitory) training were used. Forty-six chronic female dieters
were randomly assigned to one of these programs. Before and after the
training, functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to assess foodcue reactivity in brain reward regions. Participants also completed one
week of experience sampling before and after the training to examine eating
urges during daily life. Results indicated that the domain-specific inhibitory training reduced activity in the bilateral orbitofrontal cortices more
than the domain-general mindfulness-training program. Moreover, participants in the inhibitory training program also reported significant reduction
in desires to eat during post-training experience sampling period. These
findings suggest that domain-specific training may be effective in helping
people control their temptations.

E37
DOPAMINE PRECURSORS DEPLETION IMPAIRS IMPULSE CONTROL IN HEALTHY VOLUNTEERS Celine Ramdani1, Franck Vidal2, Laurence Carbonnell3, Alain Dagher4, Thierry Hasbroucq2; 1Institut de recherche
biomedicale des armées, Brétigny sur Orge, France, 2Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de la Cognition, Aix-Marseille Univ/CNRS, Marseille, France, 3Laboratoire
de Psychologie Cogntive, Aix-Marseille Univ/CNRS, Marseille, France, 4Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada — The

symptoms of Parkinson’s disease (PD) are attributed largely to the loss of
dopamine-producing neurons in the substantia nigra of the basal ganglia.
These patients notably become more impulsive and display more predisposition than healthy controls toward unplanned actions. However, in
PD, the progressive degeneration of dopamine neurons is associated with
the dysfunction of other neurotransmitter systems. The aim of the present
study was to decipher the role of the dopamine system in impulse control.
Impulsive actions entail (i) activation of the motor system by an impulse,
which is an urge to act and (ii) a failure to suppress that impulse, when
inappropriate, in order to prevent an error. These two aspects of action
impulsivity can be experimentally disentangled in conflict reaction time
tasks, which measures susceptibility to acting on spontaneous impulses (as
well as the proficiency of suppressing these impulses). In 12 healthy volunteers performing a Simon task, dopamine availability was reduced with an
amino acid drink deficient in the dopamine precursors, phenylalanine and
tyrosine. Classic behavioral measures were augmented with an analysis of
the electromyographic activity of the response effectors. Electromyography allows one to detect covert activations undetectable with behavioral
measures and reveals the participants’ ability to quickly suppress covert
activations before they result in an overt movement. Following dopamine
depletion, participants displayed comparable impulse activation but were
less proficient at suppressing the interference from this activation. These
results provide evidence that the dopamine system is directly involved in
the suppression of maladaptive response impulses.

E38
COGNITIVE MECHANISMS UNDERLYING AUDITORY SENSORY
GATING Laura Jones1, Peter Bright1; 1Anglia Ruskin University — Sensory

gating is a neurological measure of inhibition conceptualized as the reduction in cerebral activity to a second identical stimulus presented within 1
second after the first. The objective of this work was to further our understanding of the underlying cognitive components involved in gating. Sixty
participants underwent a battery of 10 cognitive tasks measuring several
forms of inhibition, fluid intelligence, and working memory. Participants
additionally completed a conditioning-testing paradigm (or paired-stimulus paradigm), during an electroencephalogram (EEG) recording as a
measure of auditory sensory gating. Bivariate correlations revealed that
sensory gating correlated with performance on five of these tasks including fluid intelligence. However, once working memory or fluid intelligence
were controlled for, sensory gating remained significantly correlated with
latent inhibition and the continuous performance task. After accounting for
the unique characteristics of these tasks, we propose that sensory gating
reflects perceived relevance of a stimulus to the current task, and/or the
inhibition of the previously identified irrelevant stimuli during selective
attention. Moreover, the correlation with fluid intelligence suggests the
presence of top-down influences on the gating process.

2015 Annual Meeting

E39
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF DISTRACTION IN ADHD: EFFECTS
OF TASK RELEVANT AND IRRELEVANT REWARD ASSOCIATIONS
ON COGNITIVE CONTROL Ili Ma1, Mieke van Holstein2, Gabry Mies3,
Maarten Mennes2, Roshan Cools2, Anouk Scheres1; 1Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, 3KU Leuven — Beneficial effects of rewards on performance have
been well established. This facilitation is typically associated with nucleus
accumbens (NAcc) activity during reward anticipation. However, reward
associations with task-irrelevant stimuli can impede performance. Refraining from response tendencies to such reward-associated task-irrelevant
stimuli has been related to activity in cognitive control areas such as the
presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA). Attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) is a prevalent developmental disorder characterized by
altered reward sensitivity and impaired cognitive control. We hypothesized that (1) irrelevant reward-associated stimuli would have more detrimental effects on cognitive control in individuals with ADHD than in controls; (2) task-relevant rewards would improve cognitive control in ADHD
to a larger extent than in controls. Both behavioural effects were expected
to be accompanied by altered activation in NAcc and cognitive control
areas (pre-SMA, IFG, DLPFC). A motivation-modulated Stroop task was
administered during fMRI to participants (14-17 years) with ADHD (n=29)
and healthy controls (n=36). Task-relevant rewards led to performance
improvement in all participants, while no effects of irrelevant reward-associations were present. The ADHD group was slower overall, and had
higher error rates than controls, but reward effects did not differ between
groups. We are currently testing whether the neural underpinnings of
task-relevant reward-associations (NAcc) and overruling of task-irrelevant
reward associations (pre-SMA, IFG, DLPFC) show different activation patterns in individuals with ADHD compared to controls.

E40
MEMORY-CONTROL INTERACTIONS INFLUENCE THE CONGRUENCY SEQUENCE EFFECT Zoe Hawks1, Daniel H. Weissman1; 1University
of Michigan at Ann Arbor — The size of the congruency effect in distracter
interference tasks (e.g., the prime-probe task) is often reduced after incongruent relative to congruent trials. Further, prior work indicates that this
congruency sequence effect (CSE) is influenced by both cognitive control
and learning and memory processes. It remains unclear, however, whether
these processes exert additive or interactive influences on the CSE. To make
this distinction, we parametrically manipulated demands on these processes in a factorial design using a novel variant of the prime-probe arrow
task. In Experiment 1, the CSE varied with an over-additive interaction
between these processes, such that the largest CSE occurred when demands
on both processes were relatively high as compared to relatively low. In
Experiment 2, we replicated this interaction while ruling out the possibility
that it was driven by conditional differences in the size of the congruency
effect. These findings indicate for the first time that over-additive memory-control interactions influence the CSE, a result that has important implications for behavioral, cognitive neuroscience, and clinical studies of this
phenomenon.

E41
EXAMINING HOW REGULAR MEDITATION PRACTICE INFLUENCES THE NEURAL OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH
REFOCUSING ATTENTION AFTER A MIND WANDERING EPISODE
Spencer Fix1, Mark Faust1, Johnson Susan1; 1University of North Carolina at Charlotte — Mind wandering (MW) often interrupts goal directed behavior and

negatively impacts mental and physical health. Several brain networks
have been implicated in the generation and suppression of MW, including
the default mode network (DMN), fronto-parietal control network (FPCN),
and dorsal attention network (DAN). Furthermore, fMRI studies have
found meditation practices are associated with increased activation in the
FPCN and decreased activity in the DMN, both coinciding with an enhanced
ability to suppress MW and maintain focused attention. The present study
compared EEG activity in novice and experienced meditators that was
associated with MW and focused attention during a period of eyes-closed
rest and a focused attention meditation. An independent component anal-

Poster Session E
ysis was conducted on EEG data to identify nodes of the DMN, FPCN, and
DAN so that event-related spectral perturbations (ERSP) analyses could
be used to estimate network activity. Significant group differences were
apparent in two nodes of the FPCN, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and
dorsal anterior cingulate, across several frequency bands suggesting experienced meditators more easily recruited their cognitive control capabilities
to suppress MW and refocus attention. Additionally, activation group differences in the precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex lends support to
the hypothesis that experienced meditators are more proficient in suppressing DMN activity and MW. Furthermore, group differences in nodes of the
DAN were observed that may be linked to enhanced focused attention. The
present investigation found EEG network activation differences between
experienced and novel meditators that suggests regular meditation practice
alters MW-related neural activity.

E42
CANNABINOID CB1 GENE VARIANT MODERATES NICOTINE
WITHDRAWAL-RELATED NEURAL ENDOPHENOTYPES OF COGNITIVE DISRUPTION Kade Jentink1, Steve Sutton2, David MacQueen2, Hui-Yi
Lin2, Jong Park2, David Drobes2, David Evans2; 1Colorado State University, 2Moffitt
Cancer Center — Nicotine withdrawal-related disruption of cognitive con-

trol contributes to the reinforcement of tobacco use. Identification of gene
variants that predict who experiences greater disruption may lead to pharmacotherapy approaches that target this phenotype. Variation on the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1) gene has been shown to predict vulnerability to
nicotine dependence, and CB1 antagonist increase attention and memory
functioning. It was therefore of interest to examine CB1 gene variants as
moderators of nicotine withdrawal-related cognitive disruption. We genotyped CB1 polymorphisms comprising the “TAG” haplotype (rs806379,
rs1535255, and rs2023239) that are associated with reduced mRNA expression. We examined variants on the polymorphisms as moderators of neural
phenotypes of nicotine withdrawal-related cognitive disruption, including
reduced ERP target (P3b) and novelty (P3a) P300 component amplitudes
and increased resting EEG theta and alpha-1 slow wave power. Caucasian
Non-Hispanic dependent smokers visited the laboratory on two occasions
following overnight smoking/nicotine deprivation. Two cigarettes (nicotine at one session and placebo during the other) were smoked prior to collecting EEG and ERP data at each session. rs806379 moderated the effects
of nicotine deprivation on both P3b amplitude reduction (p =.01) and slow
wave power (e.g., alpha-1 at midline sites , p = .004). Smokers homozygous
for the major allele exhibited greater nicotine withdrawal-related cognitive disruption as measured by these neural indices. If the current findings
are replicated and extended to additional CB1 gene variants, then future
research may also examine cannabinoid receptor antagonists as an adjunct
pharmacotherapy approach among individuals who exhibit greater nicotine withdrawal-related cognitive disruption.

E43
NEURAL REPRESENTATIONS OF COGNITIVE CONTROL MODULATED BY IMPLICITLY STRENGTHENED STIMULUS-RESPONSE
ASSOCIATIONS Tiansheng Xia1, Hui Li1, Ling Wang1; 1South China Normal
University — The dynamics of cognitive control have been investigated by
the proportion congruency effect. However, the theory that this effect is
due to attentional modulation has been challenged by contingency learning accounts. This raises the question of how the cognitive control system
operates during and after increasing the strength of stimulus-response
(S-R) associations. We employed a novel paradigm that elicits positive and
reversed Simon effects via task rule manipulations, and combined it with
a between subjects proportion congruency manipulation. The pattern of
enhancement and reversal of the positive and reversed Simon effect across
conditions suggested that participants used strengthened S-R associations
to predict responses, supporting the contingency learning account. Functional neuroimaging identified proportion congruency effects that interacted with task S-R associations, showing greater activity when strengthened S-R associations conflicted with task-defined S-R associations in
frontoparietal regions, including bilateral superior parietal lobule (SPL)
and dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC), pre-supplementary motor area/
anterior midcingulate cortex (Pre-SMA/aMCC), and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Activity in the SPL was consistent with a role in
representing the strengthened S-R associations. These results are consisCognitive Neuroscience Society

155

Poster Session E
tent with aMCC and DLPFC responding mainly to conflict induced by the
strengthened S-R associations, and subsequently biasing processing in SPL
and dPMC.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
E44
LATE BUT NOT EARLY BILINGUALS SHOW ADVANTAGE IN SUPPRESSION OF IRRELEVANT INFORMATION IN AN ERP GO/NOGO
TASK Debra Mills1, Natalie Roch1, Marissa Westerfield2, Jeanne Townsend2;
1

Bangor University, 2University of California, San Diego — Cognitive control over
two competing languages is thought to lead to a bilingual advantage in
executive function. An fMRI suggests bilingualism affects neural systems
involved in suppression of irrelevant information but not response inhibition (Luk et al., 2010). Bialystok’s hypothesis has been criticized for employing a limited set of tasks. We tested the bilingualism advantage hypothesis
using a novel event-related potential (ERP) Go/No-Go spatial attention
paradigm in monolinguals, early and late bilinguals. Participants (N=57)
attended to a central fixation and instructed to press a button when they
detected a brown gopher (Go), and to withhold responding to other stimuli (NoGo). Irrelevant distracter stimuli (bees) appeared at three, six and
nine degrees from fixation. The bilingual advantage hypothesis predicts no
group differences in ERP latencies or amplitude related to response inhibition (N2 to NoGo stimuli), or target detection (P3 to target). In contrast,
bilinguals, particularly early bilinguals, should show attenuation of ERPs
to the irrelevant stimuli. As predicted, there were no group differences in
ERPs (N2/P3) related to Go/NoGo responses. The irrelevant stimuli elicited a positivity at 100 ms (P1) that varied in amplitude with distance from
fixation. Moreover, the late bilinguals showed a smaller P1 to the irrelevant
stimuli than did the monolinguals or early bilinguals, suggesting suppression of attention to the irrelevant stimuli. The results support Bialystok’s
hypothesis with respect to suppression and response inhibition. However
the lack of differences between early bilinguals and monolinguals suggests
that effortful cognitive control may be necessary to maintain the cognitive
advantage.

E45
EEG PREDICTON ERROR SIGNALS ACCORD WITH HIERARCHICAL MODELS OF STRUCTURED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
AND TRANSFER Anne Collins1, Michael Frank1; 1Brown University — Previous

work has shown that when learning stimulus-action mappings through
reinforcement, subjects construct abstract hierarchical rules, even when this
structure does not afford any immediate advantage. Here we investigate
how and why individuals build such rules by testing further predictions
of our structured reinforcement-learning model. Subjects learned to select
correct actions in response to colored shapes. The task design was such
that two contexts (eg. colors) clustered around the same stimulus-action
rule, whereas a third context signified a distinct rule for the same stimuli (eg. shapes). Two subsequent transfer phases introduced novel stimuli (with actions to be learned) in old contexts, and then novel contexts.
Consistent with model predictions, subjects immediately benefitted from
the initial structure during these new phases. In the first phase, they transferred learning of new stimulus-action associations across contexts indicative of the same latent rule. In the second phase, they recognized previously
learned rules in novel contexts and transferred them to all stimuli in those
contexts. Moreover, they exhibited greater such transfer for rules that had
been most popular across multiple contexts, as predicted by our clustering
model. We used electroencephalography to investigate the neural dynamics of structure learning and transfer. Model fitting allowed us to infer subjects’ reward expectations and subsequent prediction errors. We found that
feedback-locked components were sensitive to prediction errors, and that
our structure learning model explained more variance in such signals than
classical reinforcement-learning models. These results provide evidence for
clustering models of structured reinforcement learning and generalization
to novel situations.

156

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

E46
COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE: COMPENSATORY DOPAMINERGIC-CHOLINERGIC INTERACTIONS Kamin
Kim1, Nicolaas Bohnen1,2, Martijn Muller1, Cindy Lustig1; 1University of Michigan,
Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System — Decline of cognitive flexi-

2

bility is one of the most prominent executive dysfunction in Parkinson’s
disease (PD) without dementia (see Robbins & Cools 2014 for review). We
examined how different neural systems interact to cause or compensate
for this impairment. The dual-syndrome hypothesis (Kehagia et al., 2013)
attributes executive dysfunctions primarily to dopaminergic denervation,
and associates cholinergic declines with early-stage visuospatial deficits
and later dementia in PD. However, dopaminergic medication does not
restore cognitive flexibility (Kehagia et al., 2010). Recent evidence that cholinergic denervation also correlates with executive decline (Bohnen et al.,
2006; 2012), along with evidence from rodent lesion models (Kucinski et
al., 2013), has led to the compensatory hypothesis: Fronto-parietal cortical
cholinergic functions associated with top-down control may be recruited
to compensate for executive dysfunctions associated with striatal dopaminergic declines, and vice versa. We tested this hypothesis by examining
associations between nigrostriatal dopaminergic and neocortical cholinergic denervation (estimated using VMAT2 and acetylcholinesterase PET,
respectively) and cognitive flexibility in 135 non-demented PD patients.
Cognitive flexibility was assessed with a task-switching test with conflict
(cued color vs word-naming using Stroop-like stimuli). Supporting the
compensatory hypothesis, regression models controlling for age revealed
an interaction between caudate dopamine and cortical cholinergic integrity: Cortical cholinergic integrity only predicted cognitive flexibility in
patients with low caudate dopamine measures, and vice versa. These finding may lend support to the compensatory hypothesis and suggest that successful treatment of cognitive executive function deficits in PD will require
not only dopaminergic but also cholinergic augmentation approaches.

E47
ASSOCIATIONS IN NEUROCOGNITIVE FUNCTIONING OF MOTHERS WITH DEPRESSION AND THEIR CHILDREN Rowena Ng1, Fred
Rogosch2, Dante Cicchetti1,2; 1Institute of Child Development; University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, 2Mt. Hope Family Center; University of Rochester, New York —
The present study examined the associations and disassociations between
neurocognitive functioning of depressed and nondepressed mothers and
their elementary school-age children. Eighty-three mothers and their children were administered the assessments from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery when their children were between age
9 to 13 years old. Of these, 41 mothers have a history of major depressive
episodes during the child’s first 20 months (DC; Mean Age of Mother = 40.2
years, SD = 5.3 years; Mean Age of Child = 10.6 years, SD = 1.1 years), and
42 are comparison mothers with no history of depression or other mental
health disorder (NC; Mean Age of Mother = 44.1 years, SD = 3.6 years;
Mean Age of Child = 11.2 years, SD = 1.4 years). No differences across cognitive indices were found across child and mother groups. However, differential relationships were observed between mother and child performances
across neurocognitive indices as a function of depression history. Associations were observed between DC mothers’ and their children’s working
memory and executive function. In contrast, no associations were observed
in NC mothers and children. Broadly, results suggest cognitive functions
subserved by prefrontal cortex may be more intimately associated in the
DC mother and their children. Findings elucidate the specific neuropsychological faculties in which maternal depression confers risk on subsequent
cognitive development.

E48
EXPLORING THE NEURAL MECHANISMS SUPPORTING
SEQUENCE LEARNING AND LANGUAGE USING EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS Gretchen N.L. Smith1, Sanjay D. Pardasani1, Gerardo E.
Valdez1, Gwen A. Frishkoff1, Christopher M. Conway; 1Georgia State University —
Sequence learning is a domain-general mechanism used to learn patterns of
information in the environment in an automatic and unconscious manner
(Cleeremans et al., 1998; Conway et al., 2010). Sequence learning abilities
seem to be essential for learning motor, social, and linguistic knowledge;

2015 Annual Meeting
however, there is little direct neural evidence supporting this claim. The
purpose of this study was to explore the overlap between the neural mechanisms supporting sequence learning and language processing. Typically-developing adult participants completed a visual sequence learning task
and a morpho-syntactic language task. Both tasks included violations of
expected items occurring in a series. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were
used to examine the underlying neurophysiological responses associated
with these expectancy violations. The results indicated that the P3a component elicited by the visual sequence learning task and the P600 component
elicited by the language task share similarities in their electrophysiological profiles. Of particular interest, the topography of the early phase of the
P600 component (525-580ms) resembled the P3a (270-330ms) component,
which was significant in frontal [t(31) = 6.172, p < .001], and right anterior
[t(31) = 4.020, p < .001] regions. Furthermore, there was a positive correlation (Spearman’s) between the P3a and the early P600 in these particular
timeframes in the right anterior region that approached significance [r(32) =
.291, p = .106]. These findings suggest some amount of overlap between the
neural mechanisms supporting sequence learning and language and may
have further implications toward the feasibility of improving language
functions by improving sequence learning.

E49
HICK’S LAW IS MIRRORED IN THE BRAIN: AN FMRI STUDY OF THE
CHOICE REACTION TIME Tingting Wu1, Alexander Dufford1,2, Patrick Hof2,
Jin Fan1,2; 1Queens College, City University of New York, 2Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York — Hick’s law states that there is a linear relationship
between reaction time (RT) and information entropy for response selection,
which is computed as the logarithm of the number of response alternatives.
While many behavioral studies have provided evidence for Hick’s Law,
brain regions with information processing functionality have rarely been
investigated. In this functional magnetic resonance imaging study, we utilized a choice reaction time task to manipulate the information entropy of
response selection (0 to 2 bits) by varying the number of response alternatives and response reversal (1 bit). We found that RT and activity of the
frontoparietal network linearly increased as a function of the information
entropy of the response alternatives. Response reversal was related to a
linear additive effect on RT and activity of the frontoparietal network. This
additive effect was associated with more than 1 bit of additive information
entropy. The behavioral interaction effect between response alternatives
and the response reversal was accompanied by synergistic activation of the
left anterior insula. These findings support the Hick’s Law in the functionality of the frontoparietal network for information processing and suggest
an integrative role of the anterior insular cortex in this network.

E50
CHANGES IN CONNECTIVITY PATTERN IN DEFAULT MODE NETWORK WITH DEVELOPMENT OF AUTOMATICITY Farzin Shamloo1,
Sebastien Helie1; 1Purdue University — The Default mode network (DMN) is

a set of brain regions that are active during periods of unfocused attention
and are suppressed when focusing on the external world. Many studies
suggest that this network has a role in regulating attentional states and cognition (Pearson et al., 2011). There is evidence suggesting that the precuneus
is the functional core of DMN (Utevsky et al., 2014). A seed-voxel coherence
analysis was performed to explore how functional connectivity between the
precuneus and other brain regions changes as a rule-based categorization
task becomes automatic. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) data of 14 participants that were each trained in rule-based categorization for 20 sessions on consecutive workdays (Helie, Roeder, & Ashby,
2010). The coherence values of the 1st day of practice (with no previous
practice) and 20th day of practice (after 11,040 trials of practice) were compared. The results show that there are no regions in which the coherence
was higher in the 1st day compared to the 20th day. On the other hand, as
categorization became more automatic, coherence between the precuneus
and some DMN and non-DMN regions increased. Specifically, increases
were observed in the left Middle Frontal gyrus (DMN), Premotor Cortex
(non-DMN), left Inferior Parietal lobule (DMN), right Middle Temporal
gyrus (DMN), Frontal Pole (non-DMN), and left Superior Parietal lobule
(non-DMN). These results suggest that communication between the precuneus (DMN’s functional core) and both DMN and task related regions
becomes more efficient with extensive practice.

Poster Session E

E51
LOWER AWARENESS OF BEHAVIORAL DEFICITS THAN UNIMPAIRED BEHAVIORS BY INDIVIDUALS WITH TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURIES Richard H. Bauer1, Lisa C. Howser; 1Middle Tennessee State University — Awareness of behavioral deficits by individuals with traumatic

brain injuries (IWTBI) has been investigated by administering standardized questionnaires or interviews to the patient and a person knowledgeable of the patient. Discrepancies between the patient and the knowledgeable person are assumed to be due to impaired awareness by the patient.
Unfortunately, responses to questionnaires and interviews may be biased.
For example, in an attempt to be released from a rehabilitation facility, an
IWTBI may rate themselves as less disabled, whereas in an attempt to have
the IWTBI receive more rehabilitation services, a knowledgeable person
may rate the IWTBI as more disabled. The present study appears to be the
first to use more objective measures to assess awareness of both behavioral
deficits and unimpaired behaviors of IWTBI. Three tasks from seven different behavioral categories were administered to 20 adult IWTBI and 20
nondisabled adults. On each trial (a) an example of the task was presented
and the testing procedure was described, (b) a performance estimate was
obtained, and (c) a trial was given. The IWTBI group performed significantly lower than the nondisabled group in 11 tasks, and the IWTBI group
significantly overestimated their performance in 9 of these tasks. When performance by the two groups was not significantly different, estimated performance by the two groups was not significantly different. These findings
suggest that, even when IWTBI have behavioral deficits, IWTBI base their
estimates on preinjury performance levels. Therefore, IWTBI have apparently not yet become fully aware of their behavioral deficits.

E52
SOCIALLY EVALUATED COLD PRESSOR STRESS RENDERS STIMULUS-RESPONSE ASSOCIATIONS HABITUAL AFTER RESPONSE
DEVALUATION IN HEALTHY CONTROLS Theresa McKim1, Samantha
Dove1, Akila Khan1, Brian Witherspoon1, Charlotte Boettiger1; 1University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill — Habitual behaviors resist change and theoretically

promote compulsive drug use and relapse susceptibility that characterize
addiction; stress has been shown to be a predictor of relapse, although the
mechanisms by which stress promotes a return to drug use are unknown. A
socially evaluated cold pressor test (SECPT) enhances habitual actions, and
elevates salivary cortisol/heart rate, but the effect of acute stress on overcoming habitual responses has not been tested empirically. We tested S-R
learning and “re-learning” after response devaluation in healthy control
participants (n=16) using a conditional S-R paradigm. Participants were
shown abstract visual stimuli, and learned, through trial and error, rules
associating the stimuli with manual responses. Prior to testing, participants
learned 2 S-R sets (FAM) to a criterion of ≥90%. After ≥1 night’s sleep, participants returned to show retention of FAM sets and learn 2 new S-R sets
(NOV). After 6 blocks, responses for one FAM set and one NOV set were
devalued to test the ability to re-learn S-R contingencies. Participants were
assigned to one of three SECPT conditions during testing: (1) stress before
NOV learning (n=4); (2) stress before re-learning (n=8); (3) no stress control (n=4). Preliminary analyses show no differences in accuracy for FAM
and NOV sets prior to devaluation based on stress group (all p’s>0.08). In
contrast, stress potentiates habitual responding that is selective to re-learning FAM associations (p=0.03), as demonstrated by increased perseverative
responding in the stress groups compared to control. Future work may test
the underlying neural substrates of these behavioral differences.

E53
PREPARING FOR (REWARDED) ACTION – ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE THAT ACTION ANTICIPATION IS COUPLED TO PREPARATORY EFFORT Hanne Schevernels1, Klaas Bombeke1, Ruth M Krebs1,
Carsten N Boehler1; 1Ghent University, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences — Usually reward effects are investigated using tasks in which motor
responses are performed in order to receive a reward. However, recently
several studies have elegantly crossed action requirements (execution
and inhibition) and outcome valence (reward and punishment avoidance)
during preparation to decouple valence from action effects and to investigate their interactions. These studies demonstrate that parts of the “reward

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

157

Poster Session E
network” including the dopaminergic midbrain and the striatum predominantly encode action anticipation irrespective of valence. Although this
distinction between action and valence is important, it seems to simultaneously entail differences in the state of preparation – a factor which has been
linked to activity in the same brain areas. Here, we used EEG to track the
amplitude of the contingent negative variation (CNV) component, which
is believed to reflect preparatory processes sensitive to different levels of
expected task demands during cue-target intervals. Moreover, in addition
to the four original conditions (go to win, go to avoid losing, no-go to win
and no-go to avoid losing) we included three control conditions (go neutral,
no-go neutral as well as no-target cues as a neutral baseline). Importantly
CNV amplitudes did not differ significantly from the baseline condition
for any of the no-go conditions. In contrast, CNV modulations were clearly
present in all three go conditions and similarly enhanced for loss avoidance
and reward anticipation. Our results indicate that the dominance of action
over valence during anticipation simultaneously entails differences in preparatory effort, and suggest that these factors are difficult to disentangle.

LANGUAGE: Other
E54
HOW AND WHEN ARE NUMBERS AND LETTERS PROCESSED IN
THE HUMAN BRAIN? Sara Aurtenetxe1, Nicola Molinaro1, Doug Davidson1,
Manuel Carreiras1; 1BCBL. Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language.
Donostia-San Sebastian. — What are the temporal dynamics of number and
word processing? Previous studies reported contrasting results: either a
hemisphere specialization for numbers and letters or the same left occipital-temporal regions involved in recognizing both types of stimuli. In the
current study native Spanish speakers were exposed to visually presented
single numbers, letters and false fonts in a dot-detection task while their
neuronal activity was recorded with magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Event-related fields (ERFs) of the epochs (-0.25 to 1 s) were calculated
and analyzed using a cluster-based permutation test at the sensor level
(combined gradiometers). The resulting data showed early dissociations
between the three type of stimuli: compared to false fonts, numbers elicited
greater amplitude evoked fields (ERFs) on occipito-temporal sensors of the
left hemisphere (100-150 ms) and on frontal sensors bilaterally (150-200ms),
and lower evoked ERFs on medial-frontal sensors (100-150 ms). Compared
to false fonts, letter ERFs were larger on left temporal sensors (100-150 ms)
and left frontal sensors (150-200 ms), and smaller on frontal medial sensors
(100-150 ms). The critical comparison between numbers and letter stimuli showed a left temporal dominance for letters (100-150 ms) but a left
occipital (150-200 ms) and right occipito-parietal (250-300 ms) dominance
for numbers. Overall, the current results suggest a temporal dissociation of
numeracy and literacy in the human brain.

E55
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF TDCS ON LANGUAGE PRODUCTION: A TMS EEG STUDY Alberto Pisoni1,2, Leonor J Romero Lauro1,2,
Giulia Mattavelli1, Costanza Papagno1; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Milano - Bicocca, 2NeuroMi, Milan center for Neuroscience — Several studies

report an improvement in language production after anodal-tDCS (a-tDCS)
applied over the left Inferior Frontal Gyrus (LIFG). We investigated the neurophysiological correlates of this effect by means of TMS-EEG coupled with
a verbal-fluency task. Two TMS-EEG recordings for session were acquired
before and after a-tDCS. In one session a-tDCS was delivered over F5 (20
minutes, 0.75 mA, 16 cm2), with standard cephalic reference, applying TMS
over left BA6, an area involved in the behavioral task. During the last 5 minutes of a-tDCS, phonemic and semantic verbal fluencies were administered.
In a control session, the same paradigm was used with sham tDCS. Local
mean field power (LMFP) of TMS-evoked potential (TEPs), a measure of
cortical excitability, was computed for seven different anatomically defined
electrodes clusters. Behavioral results confirmed an enhanced verbal fluency after real tDCS. Moreover, only after real tDCS, LMFP increased in
post as compared to sham sessions. In particular, LMFP increased over
the TMS site and in anatomically connected areas in a late time-window,
reflecting a network activity enhancement. Conversely, in the tDCS site
LMFP increased in an early time-window, indicating an increment in local
cortical excitability. A further control session, applying the same tDCS pro-

158

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
tocol but targeting with TMS the left BA7, an area not involved in the task,
confirmed the site specificity of the results, showing no increment in LMFP.
Interestingly, the increment in verbal fluency significantly correlated with
the increment of LMFP over F5, thus directly linking the behavioral results
with tDCS physiological effects.

E56
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING EMOTIONAL LANGUAGE: OR HOW YOU FEEL INFLUENCES HOW YOU COMPREHEND Amy Cohen1, Connie Shears1, Maisy Lam1, Adriana Ariza1; 1Chapman
University — Individual differences contribute to the variability observed
in emotional inferencing tasks. We examined whether an individual’s perception of an emotional word would influence their formation of a causal
inference. In a post-hoc survey following an emotional inferencing task,
participants were asked to rank a list of fourteen ambiguous emotions on
a scale of -3 (completely negative) to +3 (completely positive). Participants
who ranked positive and negative emotions as extreme (+3 or +2 and -3 or
-2, respectively) were compared to participants who ranked positive words
(i.e., satisfaction) as +3 or +2, and participants who ranked negative words
(i.e., anger) as -3 or -2. We hypothesized that the differences between participants who made extreme rankings versus those inclined to moderate rankings (either positively or negatively skewed) would reveal differences in
the formation of inferences from positive versus negative stories. Analysis
indicated a hierarchical structure, with participants who ranked the emotions as negative making the most causal inferences, followed by participants who ranked emotions as extreme. Individuals who ranked emotions
as positive were least likely to form causal inferences. Our findings demonstrate that pre-existing feelings influence how a person comprehends emotional language.

E57
THE BAIT AND SWITCH: DIFFERENCES IN SHIFTING ATTENTION
BETWEEN MONOLINGUALS AND BILINGUALS Eva Gjorgieva1, Valerie Flores1, Vanessa R. Rainey2, Riley Sticca1, Robert G. Morrison1, Rebecca L.
Silton1; 1Loyola University Chicago, 2University of West Florida — Bilingualism
has been associated with an advantage in task shifting since speaking two
languages requires frequent shifting between contexts. Among three key
aspects of executive functions, shifting is the last to develop, relying upon a
complex network of brain regions, including prefrontal, anterior cingulate,
and parietal cortices. The frontocentral P2 event-related potential is thought
to reflect the ability to detect task-relevant cue information involved with
shifting between cognitive sets (Finke, Escera, & Barceló, 2012). The present study hypothesized that bilinguals would show cognitive and neural
advantages in shifting attention. Shifting ability in monolinguals (n=19)
and Spanish-English bilinguals (n=51), with similar reading span scores,
was evaluated using a shifting Stroop task that utilized a trial-by-trial
explicit cue to direct participants between identifying ink color or word
naming. Counter to our predictions, we found that bilinguals had longer
RTs than monolinguals on shifting trials (p<.001). Event-related potentials
calculated from EEG recordings likewise showed that bilinguals had later
frontocentral P2 latencies compared to monolinguals on switching trials
(p<.05). P2 latencies were positively correlated with RTs on switching
trials (r=.42, p<.001). Bilinguals’ later P2 latency and subsequent longer
RT during shifting trials suggest that switching may be more effortful for
bilinguals. While our result may seem counter to previous studies of task
switching in bilinguals, one possible explanation may be that bilinguals
are less able to disengage from the linguistic information involved in the
switching task, thus our findings may be related to the linguistic nature of
the stimulus.

E58
THE ROLE OF DISCOURSE CONTEXT IN PRONOUN RESOLUTION:
EVIDENCES FROM EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS (ERPS) Kyra
Krass1, Christian Navarro-Torres1, Judith Kroll1, Eleonora Rossi1; 1Penn State University — A recent ERP study[1] demonstrated that native Spanish speakers

are sensitive to morpho-syntactic violations of grammatical gender occurring between the antecedent and its clitic pronoun (i.e., la manzanafem.
sing….lomasc.sing; the apple…it), as revealed by an enhanced P600. At the
same time, recent data suggest that discourse context can modulate the pro-

2015 Annual Meeting
cessing of local grammatical information[2]. Here, we use ERPs to test if preceding discourse context information can modulate the neurophysiological
response to a local grammatical gender violation between an antecedent
and its clitic pronoun. EEGs were recorded while native Spanish speakers
(mean age=22; 22 female) read materials consisting of a context sentence,
followed by a target sentence containing a local gender mismatch between
the antecedent and the clitic pronoun (as in the example above). Critically,
the context sentences comprised two additional antecedents, which did or
did not match in gender the incorrect clitic pronoun presented in the target
sentence. We hypothesized that if contextual information can modulate the
reanalysis process of the local ungrammaticality, a modulation of the P600
amplitude should be observed. In line with our predictions, we observed
a reduction of the P600 in response to the local morpho-syntactic gender
violation, only in the condition in which the preceding context contained
a possible antecedent. We conclude that context information is utilized by
native speakers to guide and reevaluate grammatical processing. References: [1] Rossi et al., (2014). Neuropsychologia, 62, 11-25. [2] Brown, et al.,
(2000). Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 29, 53–68.

E59
LATE SECOND LANGUAGE PROCESSING OF ENGLISH FOCAL
STRESS BY L1 MANDARIN SPEAKERS Ellen Guigelaar1, John Drury1;
1
Stony Brook University — Comprehension and production of linguistic prosody is notoriously difficult for late second language (L2) learners. We contrasted the performance of native (L1) English speakers and late L2 learners
(L1-Mandarin/L2-English) in an eye-tracking/truth-value-judgment study
probing the processing of prosodically marked focus under “only”. Note
that in “Steve only gave Boris the SPINACH last week”, focal stress on
“SPINACH” has truth-conditional effects: this is false if Boris was given
both the spinach and something else, but true so long as the spinach was
the only thing Boris was given. Sentences like these were played over computer speakers while matching/mismatching pictures were displayed on
a monitor. Eye movements were monitored while L1-English (N=14) and
L1-Mandarin (N=32) participants performed a sentence/picture (truthvalue) matching task. Sentences were either Dative or Double-Object constructions, had focal stress on either the Direct or the Indirect object, and
occurred with either True or False pictures (2x2x2). On the TVJT nonnative
speakers performed worse than natives overall and performed worse on
double object sentences than on datives constructions. The eye-tracking
data revealed a corresponding set of group differences. Whereas the groups
differed only marginally in the cumulative fixation time patterns for the
datives, they did for the double object constructions with significantly later
match/mismatch effects on the non-native than native fixation times. We
situate these results in the context of a discussion of L1-influences of prosody, syntax, and lexicon on L2 auditory comprehension.

E60
NETWORK ANALYSIS OF RESTING STATE ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC RECORDINGS: DETECTING ACUTE AND RESIDUAL
EFFECTS OF CONCUSSION Rene Utianski1, Julie M. Liss2, Amaal Starling1,
Rashmi Halker Singh1, Bert Vargas1, David Dodick1, John Caviness1; 1Mayo ClinicArizona, Department of Neurology, 2Speech and Hearing Science, Arizona State
University — The recent spotlight on concussion has illuminated deficits

in the standard of care of addressing acute and persistent cognitive deficits. This stems from the complex nature of the injury, which does not to
produce focal cognitive or behavioral deficits that are easily attributed to
specific physiologic processes. Here, a joint behavioral- electroencephalography paradigm was employed, looking at individuals with concussion in
acute injury and recovery, as well as a cohort of controls with no history
of concussion. A sentence verification task with speech comprehension at
various levels of degradation imposes the need for higher-order cognitive
processes; corresponding activation is analyzed via network analysis. A
multiple linear regression was utilized to assess if network measures could
predict performance of individuals with concussion; a significant model
was built, demonstrating sensitivity of modularity and number of clusters
(theta band), and path length (lower alpha) in predicting task accuracy.
Logistic regressions were conducted to assess the sensitivity of measures
in classifying individuals with concussions and persisting pathophysiology from controls. Results demonstrate network measures can differentiate
between healthy and concussed individuals, utilizing cluster number (of

Poster Session E
upper alpha) and phase lag index (gamma band). Interestingly, path length
of the beta band differentiates between controls and individuals who report
recovery from symptoms of concussion. Measures of network connectivity
show promise as a neurophysiological proxy both for otherwise undetected
higher-order cognitive deficits in individuals with concussion and for neurological recovery from concussion.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
E61
AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY OF THE ENGLISH RESULTATIVE CONSTRUCTION Gina R. Kuperberg1,2, Margarita Zeitlin1, Chelsey
R. Ott1, Eva Wittenberg1, Ray Jackendoff1, Edward W. Wlotko1; 1Tufts University,
Massachusetts General Hospital — We examined the neurocognitive mech-

2

anisms engaged in processing the English resultative construction using
event-related brain potentials (ERPs). ERPs were recorded as 28 participants read sentences containing adjectival resultatives following either real
or false direct objects. The real objects were consistent with the preceding
verb’s selection restrictions (‘Bill wiped the table…’), and therefore constrained for many possible upcoming constructions, including resultatives
(‘Bill wiped the table…clean…’). The false objects were inconsistent with
the verb’s selection restrictions and therefore constrained strongly for a
resultative construction (‘The team ran their shoes..thin …’). Incoherent
resultatives were also included, yielding a fully-crossed design (Bill wiped
the table clean/*thin; The team ran their shoes thin/*clean). There were no
differences in ERPs evoked by the real and false objects. However, coherent
resultatives following false objects evoked a smaller N400 than those following real objects, suggesting that the false objects cued comprehenders
to predict a resultative event structure (as opposed to other types of structures) with relatively high probability. This led to facilitated processing of
adjectives whose semantic features were consistent with this prediction.
Moreover, incoherent resultatives following false objects elicited a larger
anterior negativity than those following real objects, which we interpret as
reflecting costs of suppressing the predicted resultative construction. These
data suggest that comprehenders are able to use verb-argument relationships to anticipate upcoming structure and constrain semantic expectations
of upcoming words.

E62
OUT OF THE CORNER OF MY EYE: EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS
REVEAL EFFECTS OF FOVEAL LOAD ON PARAFOVEAL WORD
PROCESSING IN READING Brennan R. Payne1, Mallory C. Stites2, Kara D.
Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2SUNY Binghamton —
Readers obtain information not only from the currently fixated word, but
also from words in parafoveal vision. In English, this span ranges from four
characters to the left of fixation to upwards of 15 characters to the right.
While the nature of parafoveal representations is an oft-investigated topic,
little is known about how the dynamics of parafoveal processing are modulated by current foveal load. In the current study, event-related brain potentials were used to track the time course of foveal-on-parafoveal effects. In
a flanker RSVP paradigm (central words flanked 2° bilaterally by preceding and following words), subjects read constraining sentences in which
a target word N was expected, unexpected but plausible, or anomalous.
When N was central, the right flanker (N+1) was an invalid (non-word) or
valid preview. N+1 was valid on the next triad, when it appeared centrally.
If foveal expectancy impacts parafoveal processing, differences between
ERPs to valid and invalid previews should be larger when N is expected
versus unexpected or anomalous. When N was expected and appeared centrally, a widespread sustained negativity was observed for parafoveal nonwords relative to words. This negativity was substantially reduced when
N was unexpected or anomalous. When N+1 appeared centrally and N
was expected, a sustained positivity to previously invalid non-words was
observed. When N was unexpected or anomalous, this effect was reduced.
Taken together, these findings suggest that sentential context modulates
visual attention such that covert shifts of attention to parafoveal words are
delayed when foveal words are inconsistent with predictions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

159

Poster Session E

E63
EFFECTS OF CULTURAL CONTEXT AND FAMILIARITY ON LANGUAGE ACTIVATION Matthias Berkes1, Zehra Kamani1, Ellen Bialystok1;
1

York University — The present study investigated the role of cultural cues
and object familiarity on linguistic activation and word accessibility in
monolinguals and bilinguals. Twenty-two high- and 22 low-proficiency
Korean-English bilinguals and 22 English monolinguals were presented
with a picture and audio cue and indicated via button press whether the
heard label named the depicted object while event-related potentials were
recorded. In the critical blocks, the pictures represented exemplars that
were more typically North American or Korean, even though both exemplars took the same name in both languages (e.g., North American “soup”
vs. Korean “soup”). English or Korean labels for the pictures were presented in separate blocks; monolinguals only completed the English blocks.
RTs were significantly faster for trials in which the auditory stimulus correctly named the object and the language matched the cultural bias. For
bilinguals, there was an attenuation of the N400 when the label matched
the picture, regardless of cultural bias. In contrast, monolinguals showed
this attenuated N400 for correct labels but also revealed larger attenuation
for North American items. To test the role of familiarity in these results,
a subset of participants completed a further block presenting culturally
neutral objects that were familiar or unfamiliar (e.g., the label “monkey”
applying to both the common squirrel monkey and the less familiar saki
monkey). The N400 results mimicked those of the cultural blocks, but a late
positive component depended only on the level of familiarity. Therefore,
the effect of cultural context, object familiarity, and semantic integration
appear to be separate.

E64
DOES A PREDICTION BENEFIT OUTLAST GRAMMATICAL VIOLATIONS? A DOUBLE-VIOLATION ERP-STUDY. Dominik Freunberger1;
1

University of Salzburg — Prediction in language comprehension is known
to have beneficial effects on the processing of incoming information, be it
in terms of facilitated lexical-semantic access/ retrieval, easier integration,
or – on a behavioral level – reduced reaction times for predictable versus
unpredictable words. In an event-related potential (ERP) experiment we
tested whether this benefit survives in ungrammatical sentences. Therefore,
we manipulated the grammaticality of verbs (grammatical, ungrammatical)
that were either highly predictable (high cloze probability; CP) or unpredictable (low CP) from the preceding context. It has been demonstrated
that highly predictable words engender a P300 rather than a reduced N400
ERP-component in certain contexts and – crucially – this paradigm enabled
us to test whether the P300 reflects rather lexical (“word form”) or semantic
prediction, because the two highly predictable verbs differ with respect to
word-form (grammatical versus ungrammatical), but not with respect to
semantics (same semantic features irrespectively of grammaticality). Both
highly predictable verbs led to a P300, both unpredictable to an enhanced
N400, irrespectively of grammaticality. However, in a later time-window,
a reduced late positivity for high versus low-CP was only present in the
grammatical condition. Thus, results indicate that high predictability also
facilitates lexical-semantic processing when the input is erroneous. However, the subsequent integration process benefits from greater predictability only, when the input is grammatical. Additionally, the comparable P300
in both high-CP conditions shows that the functional underpinning of the
P300 goes beyond bare word-form matching and rather reflects the recognition of a semantically pre-activated element.

E65
QUANTIFIERS ARE INCREMENTALLY INTERPRETED IN CONTEXT, MORE THAN LESS Thomas P. Urbach1, Katherine A. Delong1, Marta
Kutas1; 1Universtity of California, San Diego — Language interpretation is often

assumed to be incremental. However, our previous studies of quantifier
expressions in isolated sentences found N400 event-related brain potential
(ERP) evidence for partial but not full immediate quantifier interpretation
(Urbach & Kutas, 2010). Here we tested similar quantifier expressions in
pragmatically supporting discourse contexts (Alex was an unusual toddler. Most / Few kids prefer sweets / vegetables...) while participants
made plausibility judgments (Experiment 1) or read for comprehension
(Experiment 2). Control Experiments 3A (plausibility) and 3B (comprehen-

160

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
sion) removed the discourse contexts. Quantifiers always modulated typical and/or atypical word N400 amplitudes. Critically, the real-time N400
effects in Experiment 2 mirrored offline quantifier and typicality crossover
interaction effects for plausibility ratings and cloze probabilities. We conclude that quantifier expressions can be interpreted fully and immediately,
though pragmatic and task variables appear to impact the speed and/or
depth of quantifier interpretation.

E66
EXAMINING THE N400 SEMANTIC CONTEXT EFFECT ITEM-BYITEM: RELATIONSHIP TO CORPUS-BASED MEASURES OF WORD
CO-OCCURRENCE Cyma Van Petten1; 1Binghamton University — Understanding the organization of semantic memory is one of the fundamental goals of cognitive science. With increasing availability of digital text,
there has been an explosion of computational methods designed to turn
patterns of word co-occurrence in large text corpora into numerical scores
expressing the “semantic distance” between any two words. The success
of such methods is typically evaluated by how well they predict human
judgments of similarity. Here, I examine how well corpus-based methods
predict amplitude of the N400 component of the event-related potential
(ERP), an online measure of lexical processing in brain electrical activity.
ERPs elicited by the second words of 303 word pairs were analyzed at the
level of individual items. Three corpus-based measures (mutual information, distributional similarity, and latent semantic analysis) of semantic distance were compared to a traditional measure of free association strength.
In a regression analysis, corpus-based and free association measures each
explained some of the variance in N400 amplitude, suggesting that these
may tap distinct aspects of word relationships (similarity versus thematic
relations between actors, actions and objects). Lexical factors of concreteness of word meaning, word frequency, number of semantic associates,
and orthographic similarity to other words also explained variance in N400
amplitude at the single-item level.

E67
EFFECTS OF CROSS LANGUAGE AMBIGUITY ON WORD LEARNING AND PROCESSING Chelsea Eddington1,2, Natasha Tokowicz1,2,3; 1University of Pittsburgh, 2Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, 3Learning Research
and Development Center — Semantic ambiguity within a language and across

languages (called translation ambiguity) have been found to affect processing and learning (e.g., Eddington & Tokowicz, 2013; Elston-Güttler &
Friederici, 2005; Rodd, Gaskell, & Marslen-Wilson, 2002). In this study we
examine how naïve learners of German acquire words that are translation
ambiguous and how they process the different types of translation-ambiguous words semantically. We are interested in how learners acquire
translation ambiguous words that are due to near-synonmys in the target
language (e.g., fruit–Frucht and Obst), polysemy in the source language
(e.g., paper–Aufsatz (content) and Papier (material)), and homonymy in
the source language (e.g., trunk–Baumstamm (tree) and Kofferraum (car)).
We examined how easily participants acquired German vocabulary words
with vocabulary tests, and examined their performance on two tasks. In
a German-to-English translation production task, participants were less
accurate at translating words that were homonyms compared to the other
word types. In a semantic-processing task, participants showed a processing advantage for the near-synonymous and polysemous types of translation-ambiguous words, suggesting that greater semantic similarity facilitates processing. Overall, type of ambiguity impacts vocabulary learning
and also affects semantic processing, depending on the meaning similarity of the ambiguous words. In a follow-up study, we will investigate the
neural correlates of vocabulary learning using event-related brain potentials. Specifically, the test task will be focused on the N400 component to
examine semantic processing. We will discuss the results with respect to
how they relate to semantic ambiguity processing and to models of bilingual memory.

E68
THE MODULATION OF REPETITION PRIMING EFFECTS BY SENTENCE CONTEXT: AN ERP STUDY WITH AMBIGUOUS WORDS
Mariya Chernenok1, Barry Gordon1,2, Kerry Ledoux1; 1Cognitive Neurology/Neuropsychology, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,

2015 Annual Meeting
MD, 2Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
— The repetition of word forms results in repetition priming, the process-

ing benefit on subsequent presentations of a word relative to the first. In
event-related potentials (ERPs), repetition priming effects in lists and in
sentences have been observed as a reduction in the amplitude of the N400
component; this may also be accompanied by changes in the amplitude of
the late positive component (LPC). We wished to further explore repetition priming effects by using ambiguous words whose meaning must be
derived from their sentence context. We examined lexical repetition priming in prime and target sentence pairs that biased the same or different
meanings of ambiguous words to determine the extent to which repetition
priming depends on the repetition of lexical form versus lexical semantics,
and to look at interactions between repetition priming and sentence context.
Across 24 participants, we found N400 priming effects to repeated ambiguous words, but only when the target context biased the dominant meaning
of the word; when the subordinate meaning was biased, repetition resulted
in a larger amplitude N400, relative to the control. In the dominant condition, a reduction of the LPC was observed to ambiguous word targets that
repeated form, meaning, or both from the prime sentence; in the subordinate condition, a reduction in the amplitude of the LPC was observed only
for targets that repeated both form and meaning. Thus, we observed an
interaction between lexical semantics and sentence context in determining
the magnitude of repetition priming effects for ambiguous words.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
E69
CROSS-LINGUISTIC COMPARISON OF THE PROCESSING OF
CLASSIFIERS IN MANDARIN AND ENGLISH Zhiying Qian1, Susan
Garnsey1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Classifiers are words

like “sheet” in “a sheet of paper”. In both Mandarin and English, the meaning of a classifier and its noun must match. Mandarin requires that all
quantified noun phrases include classifiers (e.g., two animal-classifier cat),
while English only requires them with quantified mass nouns (e.g., two
sheets of paper). In both languages, classifiers vary in specificity: some fit
with many nouns (e.g., a piece of) while others fit with only a few nouns
(e.g., a head of). The present study investigated 1) whether Mandarin and
English classifiers are processed similarly, and 2) whether the additional
constraint supplied by specific classifiers facilitates the processing of the
nouns following them. In separate studies, native Mandarin and English
speakers read sentences containing specific or general classifiers and nouns
that matched them or did not (There is a {cup / sheet} of coffee on the
table) while EEG was recorded. In both languages a sustained anterior negativity beginning at the P2 response to the classifier was larger for general
than for specific classifiers, suggesting that readers found the additional
constraint supplied by specific classifiers helpful. Even though violations
of other kinds of agreement in English trigger effects on P600 rather than
N400, mismatching nouns following classifiers elicited larger N400s than
matching nouns in both languages, indicating similar semantic processing
of classifier-noun agreement in the two languages. In addition, ungrammatical Mandarin sentences that were missing their required classifiers
triggered P600 effects early in the experimental session, shifting to an Anterior Negativity later.

E70
RHYTHMIC EFFECTS OF SYNTAX PROCESSING IN MUSIC AND
LANGUAGE Harim Jung1, Samuel Sontag1, YeBin Shiny Park1, Psyche Loui1;
1

Wesleyan University — Music and language are human cognitive and neural
functions that share structural similarities. Past theories posit shared neural
resources between syntax processing in music and language (Patel, 2003),
and a dynamic attention network that governs general temporal processing (Large and Jones, 1999). Experiment 1 of this study focuses on interactions between rhythmic expectancy and musical and linguistic syntax in
a reaction time paradigm. Stimuli adapted from (Slevc et al., 2009) were
presented as sentence segments of one or two words paired with musical
chords, and RT was recorded for each segment. Linguistic syntax expectancy violations appeared in a garden-path design, harmonic expectation
violations, presented as out-of-key chords, and rhythmic expectancy violations, through early and late temporal perturbations, were manipulated at

Poster Session E
the critical region. Results show a three-way interaction (F(2,499) = 3.59, p <
.05) with main effects of rhythmic expectancy (F(1,508) = 4.04, p < .05) and
linguistic syntax expectancy (F(1,523) = 4.15, p < .05) on RT. Experiment 2
investigated rhythmic and linguistic expectancies, independently of musical syntax, and replicates main effects from Experiment 1. Ongoing work
also extends the behavioral results in an EEG study. Overall, the novel
effects of rhythm suggest an expansion of the Shared Syntactic Integration
Resource Hypothesis (SSIRH), as well as dynamic models of attentional
entrainment. The different interactions and simple effects of these three
factors across different timescales also suggest asymmetric sampling across
these complex stimuli (Poeppel, 2003) and give insight into the integration
of musical and linguistic syntax processing with attentional entrainment.

E71
THE PROCESSING OF WORD ORDER VARIATIONS IN AUSTRIAN SIGN LANGUAGE (ÖGS) – AN ERP - STUDY ON “SUBJECT
PREFERENCE” Julia Krebs1, Ronnie Wilbur2, Dietmar Roehm1; 1University
of Salzburg, 2Purdue University — In transitive structures, sentence-initial

ambiguous argument NPs are preferentially interpreted as the „subject“.
Therefore, SOV is favored over OSV leading to the effect that sentence-initial ambiguous object-NPs have to be reinterpreted towards a non-preferred
OSV-structure. This reanalysis is reflected e.g. in lower acceptability ratings, longer reaction times and different ERP-patterns for OSV compared to
SOV. In ÖGS the basic word order is SOV. However, OSV-orders are possible. In an ERP-study we presented SOV- and OSV-orders involving two
verb types (agreeing verbs and plain verbs) to deaf signers to test whether
these structures are processed differently. Data evaluation revealed lower
acceptability ratings, longer reaction times as well as a biphasic N400-late
positivity-ERP pattern for OSV in comparison to SOV for both verb types
measured at a time point before the verb sign has been established. Like
Haupt et al. (2008) we consider the observed ERP pattern as an instance of
a “reanalysis N400“ followed by a “late positivity“ - a pattern which previously has been observed for grammatical function reanalysis [1]. Furthermore, the visual-(non)manual modality of sign languages allows earlier
disambiguation compared to reanalysis effects described for spoken languages. All in all, these findings indicate that signers use the “subject”-first
strategy for the processing of sentence-initial ambiguous arguments. [1]
Haupt et al. (2008). J Mem Lang, 59(1), 54-96.

E72
THE ROLE OF MORPHOLOGICAL MARKEDNESS IN THE PROCESSING OF NUMBER AND GENDER AGREEMENT IN SPANISH:
EVIDENCE FOR PREDICTIVE PROCESSING FROM EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS José Alemán Bañón1, Jason Rothman1; 1University of
Reading — Syntactic features such as number and gender are thought to
be asymmetrically represented. For example, in Spanish, plural and feminine are assumed to be marked for number and gender, whereas singular
and masculine are argued to lack a number/gender specification. We used
event-related potentials to examine how these differences in markedness
impact agreement resolution. Agreement was examined between inanimate
nouns and predicative adjectives across a relative clause boundary (...CATEDRAL que parecía INMENSA… “…cathedral-FEM-SG that looked hugeFEM-SG…”). Markedness was examined by manipulating the gender of the
nouns (half masculine/half feminine) and their number specification (half
singular/half plural). For each feature, half of the violations involved an
underspecified adjective (singular or masculine) in a context that required
a marked one (plural or feminine noun). The other half involved the opposite pattern. Overall, subjects read 240 sentences and 240 distractors presented word by word (450ms on/300ms off). Results (n=27) showed that
both number and gender violations elicited a posteriorly-distributed P600,
a component associated with morphosyntactic repair. Markedness did
not impact the P600, which was equally robust across violations. Number
and gender violations also yielded a small centro-parietal N400, an effect
argued to reflect prediction of specific forms. This effect was modulated
by markedness, as it was only significant for violations which involve an
underspecified adjective (singular or masculine) in a context that required
a marked one (plural or feminine noun). These results are consistent with
the possibility that markedness on the noun is used to predict the number/
gender specification of the agreeing adjective.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

161

Poster Session E

E73
THE ROLE OF PHONOLOGICAL SALIENCE IN THE DETECTION OF
MORPHOSYNTACTIC ERRORS: ERP EVIDENCE Brigitta Fodor1, John
E. Drury1; 1Stony Brook University — Language ERP studies examining mor-

pho-syntactic violations (e.g., “He *walk/They *walks”) reliably find P600
effects which are often, but not always, preceded by left anterior negativities (LANs). However, the reasons why LAN effects are less consistently
found are still not understood. Marcinek et al. (2014) showed that the presence of an illicit suffix (e.g., “They *walks”) elicits a later onset P600 than
an expected but absent affix (e.g., “He *walk”). The present study asked
whether the phonological saliency (i.e syllabicity) of the affix affects P600
onset latency and/or amplitude, both for present illicit affixes and predicted but absent ones. We visually presented grammatical/ungrammatical sentences containing verbs with present/absent third person agreement
affixes (non-syllabic [-s/-z], e.g. STARTS vs. syllabic [-Іz], e.g. BROWSES),
and with past tense/perfective affixes (non-syllabic [-t/-d], e.g. BROWSED
vs. syllabic [-Іd], e.g. STARTED). Violations were always more positive
going then their grammatical counterparts, but suffixed forms also generally elicited a larger positivity than their non-suffixed counterparts. As
for onset latency, only the non-syllabic illicit affixes evoked a later P600; in
every other condition, the positivity came earlier, even in the syllabic illicit
case. Only the cases eliciting later onset P600 effects seemed to show any
indication of prior LAN-type responses. These data provide important new
information about the factors which determine P600 onset and amplitude
in morpho-syntactic violation paradigms, and thus contribute directly to
our understanding of the circumstances under which we may expect these
(large amplitude) ERP effects to either co-occur (or not) with prior LANs.

E74
PROCESSING RELATIVE CLAUSES AND RIGHT-BRANCHING SENTENCES IN CHINESE: AN ERP STUDY Talat Bulut1, Shih-kuen Cheng1,
Denise H. Wu1; 1National Central University, Taiwan — There is extensive litera-

ture on English relative clauses that consistently shows that subject relative
clauses (SRC) are easier to process than object relative clauses (ORC). Most
of the studies in typologically different languages such as Korean and Japanese also revealed similar results. However, previous studies on Chinese
relative clauses have been controversial and inconclusive. In this study,
event-related potentials were recorded when native speakers of Chinese
read three types of Chinese sentences with different syntactic complexity:
SRC, ORC and right-branching sentences. By minimizing the surface differences among the sentences in these conditions and treating the processing
of right-branching condition as a baseline, we aimed to examine whether
Chinese relative clauses exhibited a SRC or ORC advantage. The behavioral results showed that comprehension questions of syntactically simple
(right-branching) sentences were answered more accurately and quickly
than those of syntactically complex (relative clauses) sentences, while no
difference of these off-line measurements was observed between SRC and
ORC sentences. Importantly, the P600 component elicited by the head noun
of the SRC sentence was significantly different from that elicited by the
head noun of the ORC sentence, which did not differ from the P600 component elicited by the corresponding noun phrase in the right-branching
sentence. In line with the findings from Basque, the current results from
Chinese challenge the universality of SRC advantage. Instead, they support processing accounts based on linear distance between dependents, as
Chinese SRCs are characterized with more distant dependency relationship
between the noun phrase and the verb phrase than ORCs.

E75
PERFUSION AND RECOVERY OF SYNTACTIC COMPREHENSION
IN CHRONIC AGRAMMATIC APHASIA Ellen Fitzmorris1, Yufen Chen1,
Todd B. Parrish1, Cynthia K. Thompson1; 1Northwestern University — Emerging

evidence suggests that functional recovery after stroke can be predicted
by cerebral hemodynamics (e.g. Hillis et al. 2000; Fridriksson et al., 2010).
The present study examined longitudinal relations between baseline perfusion and lesion volume in regions of the brain involved in sentence
processing, and treatment-related improvement in noncanonical sentence
comprehension. Ten individuals with chronic agrammatic aphasia underwent neuroimaging and language evaluation before and after treatment for
noncanonical sentence processing. We measured improvement in sentence

162

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
comprehension and baseline perfusion and lesion volume within: a) primary syntactic processing areas engaged by healthy individuals, b) compensatory areas recruited in individuals with agrammatism in previous
studies (Thompson et al., 2010), c) perilesional tissue (within 15mm of the
lesion), and d) a domain-general control region. In primary syntactic areas,
neither perfusion nor lesion volume predicted recovery, though we found
marginally significant negative correlations with lesion volume in Broca’s
area (ρ = -.5, p = .19). Across compensatory areas, smaller lesion volume
predicted recovery (ρ = -.7, p < .05). In perilesional tissue, recovery was predicted by, surprisingly, slower perfusion (ρ = -.6, p = .06), and this relation
became significant in stepwise linear regression when baseline comprehension was controlled for (β = -2.65, p < .001). These results contradict prior
claims of a beneficial role of perilesional tissue in recovery after stroke. Perilesional tissue may be maladaptive to recovery of noncanonical sentence
comprehension, for which the neural computations may be too complex for
abnormally functioning perilesional tissue to carry out successfully.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development &
aging
E76
USE OF CONJUGATED ESTROGEN, PREMARIN, MAY PRESERVE
BRAIN STRUCTURE Christina Boyle1, Cyrus A Raji1,2, Kirk I Erickson3, Oscar
L Lopez3, James T Becker3, H Michael Gach3, W T Longstreth4, Mikhail Popov3,
Lewis Kuller3, Owen T Carmichael5, Paul M Thompson1; 1University of Southern
California, 2University of California at Los Angeles, 3University of Pittsburgh,
4
University of Washington, 5Pennington Biomedical Research Center — Contro-

versy continues over hormone therapy (HT) and its risks and benefits. By
1992, the most prescribed conjugated estrogen in the U.S. was Premarin.
In the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) Study, Premarin users had higher
risk of heart disease, breast cancer and dementia. Subsequently, HT usage
declined dramatically. Questions remain about its medical effects. Contrary
to the WHI study, some evidence suggests that HT benefits may outweigh
the risks, but Premarin may be an exception. Here we study whether Premarin use predicts brain volumetric measures that may indicate clinically
silent brain injury. Many studies suggest that such injury increases risk of
dementia, stroke, and early mortality among elderly individuals. We studied 562 female subjects from the multi-site Cardiovascular Health Study
- 79 with AD, 58 with MCI, and 425 healthy controls (mean age (at scan):
73.8±4.2 years). We acquired volumetric T1-weighted MRI scans and performed tensor-based morphometry to assess regional brain volumes. We
performed a voxelwise multivariate analysis, regressing use of Premarin,
assessed by current prescriptions and self-reported past usage, on brain
volume. We controlled for covariates including study site, age, education,
MCI/AD diagnosis and body mass index (BMI). Women taking conjugated
estrogen had significantly greater volumes in distributed brain regions
including the frontal and temporal lobes. This evaluation of HT and neuroimaging is one of the largest voxel-based studies of a human population.
Premarin use was associated with greater regional brain volumes independent of co-morbid MCI/AD status and BMI. Conjugated estrogen may help
preserve brain tissue, as reflected on MRI.

E77
MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE MATURATION IS RELATED TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF VERBAL MEMORY Qijing Yu1, Dana Anderson1, Mayu
Nishimura1, Noa Ofen1; 1Wayne State University — Human ability to mem-

orize and recall information improves dramatically from childhood to
adulthood. The correspondence between memory development and brain
maturation, however, is not well understood. In this study we measured
memory functioning using the California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT-C) in
81 participants, aged 8-25 years (M=16.25, SD=5.00). Memory functioning
was assessed by recall (number of correctly recalled words) and semantic
mnemonic strategy use (number of semantic clusters during recall). Structural brain development was assessed by measures of hippocampal (HC)
volume and cortical thickness in the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) and
prefrontal cortex (PFC). Older participants recalled more words and used
more semantic clustering (ps<=.001). HC volume was not associated with
age or recall but differentially related to semantic clustering use across age

2015 Annual Meeting
(F(1,71)=4.90, p=.009); smaller HC was associated with more strategy use
only in older participants. PHG cortical thickness was not associated with
age but differentially related to recall across age (F(1,74)=6.35, p=.008); thinner PHG in younger participants, but thicker PHG in older participants was
associated with better recall. PHG cortical thickness also showed differential relation with semantic clustering use across age (F(1,71)=7.19, p=.022);
thicker PHG was related to more strategy use only in older participants.
PFC thickness was associated with age but not with recall and it was marginally differentially associated with semantic clustering use across age
(F(1,71)=3.25, p<.10); thicker PFC was related to more strategy use only in
older participants. Overall, these findings suggest that variability in structural maturation differentially account for variability in memory performance across development.

E78
PREDICTING COGNITIVE DECLINE IN THE ELDERLY FROM 500+
HETEROGENEOUS BIOMARKERS USING MACHINE LEARNING
Sarah K. Madsen1, Greg Ver Steeg2, Adam Mezher1, Neda Neda Jahanshad1, Talia
N. Nir1, Xue Hua1, Boris A. Gutman1, Aram Galstyan2, Paul M. Thompson1; 1Imaging Genetics Center, USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2USC Information Sciences
Institute, Marina Del Rey, CA — Identifying biomarkers for cognitive decline

is a major goal of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) research. We used a novel
data-driven machine learning approach to rank an extensive list (500+)
of blood biomarkers for predicting cognitive decline in 1688 older adults
from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Laboratory
data included 195 blood tests related to cardiovascular health, oxidative
stress, liver function, inflammation and immunology, hormones, growth
factors, nutrition, metabolism and diabetes, cancer risk, and amyloid and
tau levels. AD risk genotypes and cerebrospinal fluid tests for amyloid
and tau levels were also included. MRI biomarkers included regional summary measures of white matter tract integrity, cortical and subcortical gray
matter, and measure of longitudinal brain change. Cognitive decline was
defined by longitudinal change in Mini-Mental State Exam score over one
and two-year intervals. We applied the novel unsupervised machine learning method CorEx to discover latent factors and a hierarchical structure
that best explain correlations among clusters of biomarkers. We ranked the
predictive power of factors using decision tree regression (in terms of mean
squared error). APOE4 was the most predictive individual biomarker and
a cluster including temporal gray matter measurements was the most predictive cluster of biomarkers for cognitive decline. Canonical genetic and
neuroanatomical biomarkers may outperform other biomarkers in predicting age-related cognitive decline. Prediction was improved by combining
multiple brain MRI biomarkers, compared to using any one MRI biomarker
alone. This novel method has broad applications for assessing and ranking
large numbers of potential biomarkers for various cognitive processes.

E79
EXAMINING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PHYSICAL FITNESS
AND COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS IN OLDER ADULTS Hanna Fang1, Ilana
B. Clark1, Jennifer J. Heisz1; 1McMaster University — Alzheimer’s disease is the

most common form of dementia, causing progressive neural decline leading to the deterioration of memory and the loss of functional independence.
There is currently no cure for Alzheimer’s disease and thus, it is paramount
to identify protective mechanisms that may prevent or delay the onset of the
disease. Physical activity may help to preserve aspects of cognitive function
that decline with age and reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s disease; however,
physical fitness has been found to benefit only certain aspects of cognition
such as executive functions and processing speed, while the link between
physical fitness and memory remains unclear. The purpose of the study
was to determine the relationship between physical fitness and memory by
examining both subjective and objective memory. Higher physical fitness
was associated with better subjective memory, better executive functions,
and faster processing speed but was not related to objective memory. Interestingly, subjective memory was not related to objective memory indicating
poor meta-memory awareness. However, subjective memory was associated with executive functions and when controlling for executive functions
the relationship between physical fitness and subjective memory was eliminated. Taken together the results suggest that physical activity may not
directly support memory to reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Instead,

Poster Session E
physical fitness may reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s disease by improving
other aspects of cognition, which may compensate for memory loss and
artificially increase older adults’ beliefs about their memory ability.

E80
SPECTRAL GRAPH THEORY SHOWS BRAIN NETWORK DISCONNECTION IN APOE-4 RISK GENE CARRIERS Madelaine Daianu1,
Derrek Hibar1, Neda Jahanshad1, Talia Nir1, Adam Mezher1, Clifford Jack2,
Michael Weiner3, Matthew Bernstein2, Paul Thompson1; 1Imaging Genetics
Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Marina del
Rey, CA, USA, 2Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA, 3Department of Radiology, Medicine, and Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, CA, USA — Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) can detect
subtle changes in white matter integrity in the nervous system and was
used here to study 42 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) participants scanned at
3-Tesla (41 diffusion weighted and 5 b0 images) as part of the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Using whole brain tractography,
we reconstructed structural connectivity networks describing fiber density
between 68 distinct cortical regions and tested their relationship to the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele (APOE-4) – a well know genetic risk factor
for late-onset AD. We assessed – the first time in this context, the spectrum
of the brain network, which is a topic of study in a branch of mathematics
known as spectral graph theory or algebraic connectivity. The spectrum of
a graph was obtained from the Laplacian matrix computed on the brain
network. We assessed the association between the zero eigenvalues of the
Laplacian matrix, which reflect disconnections in the network, and the
APOE-4 risk factor using a linear regression with age and gender as covariates. We found that the number of disconnected components increased
with the number of copies of the APOE-4 allele in people with AD (FDR
p-value=0.04). Disconnections were detected in the entorhinal, frontal and
temporal poles bilaterally, regions that typically show AD pathology. Each
additional copy of the APOE-4 risk gene may weaken connections in the
brain network, providing evidence for the previously hypothesized ‘disconnection syndrome’ that may lead to cognitive decline in AD.

E81
DISSOCIABLE CONTRIBUTIONS OF REPRESENTATIONAL SPECIFICITY AND RETRIEVAL PROCESSES TO AGE-RELATED DECLINES
IN RECOGNITION MEMORY Alexandra Trelle1, Richard Henson2, Jon
Simons1; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit
— Memory decline for the specific details of previous events is character-

istic of cognitive aging. Recent evidence suggests that the mechanisms
underlying this deficit may vary among sub-groups of the elderly population, and may include impoverished stimulus representations, impaired
retrieval processes, or a combination. The present study investigated this
question by comparing performance of younger adults (18-30 yrs), youngolder adults (60-70 yrs), and old-older adults (71-80 yrs) on an object recognition memory test. Participants were asked to discriminate between
studied objects and similar lures that shared either a high or low degree
of perceptual overlap. Recognition was tested using both old/new (ON)
and forced choice (FC) formats, thereby varying demands on representational specificity and controlled retrieval processes in a factorial design.
We found that younger adults exhibited reliance on retrieval support for
high similarity discriminations only, whereas young-older adults benefited
from retrieval support for both low and high similarity discriminations,
suggesting greater dependence on the reinstatement of stimulus details at
retrieval. In contrast, old-older adults displayed a benefit of retrieval support for low but not high similarity discriminations, suggesting that the
reinstatement of stimulus details was insufficient to support memory at a
high level of specificity, perhaps due to a reduction in the complexity of
stimulus representations. These results suggest that both factors of representational quality and retrieval control contribute to memory deficits in
old age, but differentially even among healthy older adults, highlighting
the importance of considering the heterogeneity of the elderly population
in studies of cognitive aging.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

163

Poster Session E

E82
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN RELATIONS BETWEEN EPISODIC MEMORY AND HIPPOCAMPAL SUBREGION VOLUME
DURING EARLY TO MIDDLE CHILDHOOD Elizabeth Mulligan1, Sarah
L Blankenship1, Katherine Leppert1, Stephanie Merwin1, Lea Dougherty1, Tracy
Riggins1; 1University of Maryland College Park — The hippocampus is shown

to be fundamental for episodic memory ability in school-aged children and
adults. Previous research suggests that age-related differences in episodic
memory are related to developmental differences in hippocampal structure
along the longitudinal axis (anterior to posterior) during middle childhood (DeMaster et al., 2013). However, relatively little is known about the
how the development of hippocampal subregions contributes to episodic
memory performance earlier in life, when improvements in memory are
quite rapid. In the present study, we collected volumes of the hippocampal head, body, and tail, and episodic memory measures in children ages
5-10 years (mean = 7.22 years, SD=.85, n=57, 30 females, oversampled for
offspring of parents with a depression history). Because prior research suggests associations between hippocampal subregion volumes and memory
vary according to age, we grouped children into younger (5-7.11 years,
n=28) and older (7.11-10 years, n=29) age groups using a median split and
examined associations in hippocampal subregion volumes and episodic
memory performance in each group separately. In younger children, negative correlations were observed between episodic memory performance
and bilateral hippocampal body and tail. In older children, a positive correlation was observed between episodic memory performance and right
hippocampal body. These results suggest age-related improvements early
in life may be attributed to the development of specific hippocampal subregions. Future analyses on the larger sample will examine the role of experience, particularly exposure to parental depression and familial liability for
major depressive disorder, on relations between memory and hippocampal
subregion volume across development.

E83
INVESTIGATING THE IMPACT OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE ON NEURAL CORRELATES OF EPISODIC
MEMORY AT MIDLIFE Lindsay Wallace1,3, Elizabeth Ankudowich1,3, Alexander Swierkot2,3, Stamatoula Pasvanis3, Diana Kwon1,3, David Maillet4, M Natasha Rajah2,3; 1Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada, 2Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, 3Brain
Imaging Centre, Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, Canada,
4
Harvard University, Boston, USA — Episodic memory impairment is a consis-

tent, pronounced deficit reported in pre-clinical stages of sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Changes in the neural correlates of episodic memory
are present at midlife, decades before the onset of AD. Context memory
tasks are sensitive to memory decline at midlife and may facilitate exploration of brain changes associated with AD risk factors, such as family history, in middle-aged adults. Objective: Investigate the effects of age and
AD risk (family history of AD) on the neural correlates of episodic memory
retrieval. Methods: Middle-aged participants with no family history of AD
(MA-FH; n=29), and those with a family history of AD (MA+FH; n=23)
performed a context memory task while undergoing fMRI. Results: There
were no significant performance differences between MA-FH and MA+FH
across all contextual memory tasks. A behavioural partial least squares
analysis adjusted for age identified two significant latent variables. The
first was driven by the MA-FH group and identified increased activity in
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions were positively correlated with retrieval accuracy and negatively correlated with age
in this group. The second was driven by the MA+FH group, this latent variable indicated increased activity in PFC and MTL regions were positively
correlated with age in the MA+FH. These findings suggest that age-related
changes differ across middle aged adults as a function of whether they have
a family history of AD, a prominent AD risk factor.

2015 Annual Meeting

E84
EXAMINING CHANGES IN CORTICAL THICKNESS AND CONTEXT
MEMORY AT MIDLIFE Alexander Swierkot1,2, Mallar Chakravarty1,2, Raihaan
Patel2, Elizabeth Ankudowich1,2, Lindsay Wallace1,2, Stamatoula Pasvanis2, Maria
Natasha Rajah1,2; 1McGill University, 2Douglas Mental Health University Institute,
Montreal, Canada — Episodic memory is the ability to remember an item in

rich contextual detail. Recent studies indicate that as early as midlife, adults
start to exhibit declines in episodic memory as measured by tasks requiring the recollection of spatial and/or temporal context (context memory
tasks). However, it remains unclear what neural changes underlie these
early signs of memory deficits at midlife. In the current study we aimed to
examine if regional cortical thickness changes were associated with context
memory decline at midlife. Thirty-six young adults, aged 20-35 years, and
52 middle-aged adults, aged 40-58 years, participated in spatial and temporal context memory tasks for faces. Between groups repeated measures
ANOVA found that young significantly outperformed middle-aged adults
as measured by accuracy. All participants underwent a structural MRI scan
and a fully automated pipeline (CIVET) was used to measure cortical thickness across the whole brain (Y. Ad-Dab’bagh et al., 2006). A general linear
model, accounting for gender, age, accuracy and age by accuracy interaction terms, found that cortical thinning in left ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (VLPFC) is significantly related to age, and that a positive relationship between task accuracy and left VLPC thickness was increasingly more
important with age. These results suggest that cortical thinning in the left
VLPFC may be an initial neurological change that may be implicated in the
onset of episodic memory deficits as measured by context memory tasks.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
E85
DOMINANT EPISODE ELEMENTS ORGANIZE RELATIONAL BINDING TO SHAPE COHESIVE MEMORY REPRESENTATIONS Donna J.
Bridge1, Joel L. Voss1; 1Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine — Of
the many elements that comprise an episode, are any particularly important for coherent memory binding? We hypothesized that some dominant
elements are disproportionately bound with less-dominant elements, and
therefore organize memory binding. We tested this hypothesis using a
multi-element episodic memory task. Subjects (N=31) studied three objects
at specific locations. One object location was retrieved after a brief delay,
which we hypothesized would increase dominance of that object. Memory
was later tested for the other, less-dominant objects. When high-dominance
objects served as reminder cues, retrieval of less-dominant objects was significantly more accurate than when less-dominant objects were reminder
cues. Binding of all objects therefore was strongest to the high-dominance
object. Further, dominance was associated with rapid viewing of high-dominance objects followed by subsequent viewing of less-dominant objects.
A control condition involving passive manipulation of objects rather than
active retrieval established the specificity of these dominance effects on eye
movements and behavior. Active retrieval therefore selectively increases
dominance of specific episode elements and thereby organizes episodic
memory. Previously, we showed that active high-dominant cues yielded
ERP correlates of recollective processing and that these neural signals were
modulated by dominance-related eye-movements during encoding. Here,
we examined fMRI correlates of these dominance-specific effects to test the
hypothesis that the hippocampus is uniquely involved in the selection of
dominant elements available for binding with other less-dominant event
elements. In sum, binding is not equipotent, but rather dominant elements
have disproportionately strong binding and therefore serve as effective
retrieval cues for coherent episodes.

E86
MEMORY AS DECISION-MAKING: THE SUCCESSFUL RETRIEVAL
EFFECT TELLS US ALMOST NOTHING ABOUT MEMORY ACCURACY Tyler Santander1, Brian A. Lopez2, Misty Schubert2, Craig Bennett2,
Michael B. Miller2; 1University of Virginia, 2University of California, Santa Barbara
— The successful retrieval effect—the differential neural response when
correctly identifying old versus new items—is a highly robust and reliable
finding in the neuroimaging literature, emerging across memory studies

164

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
with considerably different experimental paradigms. This contrast is of
massive theoretical importance because it is thought to indicate the mental
representation (i.e. the ecphory) of the decision evidence. In this study,
we attempted to determine the extent to which successful retrieval-related brain activity is indicative of actual memory accuracy versus one’s
monitoring of the retrieval evidence; recognition behavior and associated
brain activity were thus examined during an fMRI task involving criterion
shifting. The degree of shifting between a liberal and conservative criterion
in High- and Low-target-probability conditions was variable across participants, but memory accuracy (d-prime) was equitable across conditions.
While whole-brain, mass-univariate analyses yielded typical frontoparietal
activations that are a hallmark of successful episodic retrieval, subsequent
ROI analyses across 6 frontoparietal regions demonstrated consistent modulation of activity by criterion placement only. We therefore employed a
sparse Bayesian learning technique, relevance vector regression (RVR),
in an effort to decode inter-individual variability in d-prime and criterion
from whole-brain, multivariate patterns of Hit > CR activity. Although
RVR failed to decode individual differences in d-prime across conditions,
it spectacularly approximated both liberal criterion placement and conservative criterion placement. Taken together, these results imply that the activations we typically understand as “the successful retrieval effect” may tell
us little about memory accuracy itself—rather, they may only indicate the
extent to which one is monitoring memory evidence.

E87
NEURAL EVIDENCE FOR THE ROLE OF ATTENTION IN ENCODING
PRECISE MEMORIES Stephanie A. Gagnon1, Rosanna K. Olsen2,1, Jonathan
H. Drucker3,1, Nicolas Davidenko4,1, Anthony D. Wagner1; 1Stanford University,
Rotman Research Institute, 3Emory University, 4University of California, Santa
Cruz — The ability to detect subtle differences between an experienced stim-

2

ulus and a highly similar, but novel test probe partially rests on having
encoded a precise representation of the stimulus. Top-down attention is
likely a critical component of precise stimulus encoding, and thus may be
central to protecting against similarity-based memory errors. The present fMRI experiment examined how trial to trial variations in attention
at encoding can enable future accurate recognition of studied items (i.e.,
precise memory) relative to false recognition of similar lures (i.e., general
memory) by parametrically modulating the perceptual similarity between
study items and retrieval cues. This manipulation provided a controlled
measure of study-test similarity that allowed us to probe the neural correlates of attention during precise vs. general encoding, and across levels
of study-test similarity at retrieval. At encoding, subjects viewed abstract
objects while performing a size judgment task; each object was studied
three times. At retrieval, subjects viewed objects that were either identical,
perceptually near to, or perceptually far from the studied object, and indicated if each object was old or new using a 1-5 confidence rating. During
encoding, neural activation in regions implicated in top-down visual attention (superior parietal lobule, medial intraparietal sulcus) and object representation (lateral occipital cortex) decreased with study repetitions. Critically, these regions were more active during the successful formation of
precise vs. general memories. These findings suggest that increased visual
attention during encoding supports the ability to subsequently perform
fine-tuned mnemonic discriminations between studied items and similar
lures.

E88
RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PICTORIAL CONTEXT ON MEMORY: AN
ERP STUDY Holly J. Bowen1, Elizabeth A. Kensinger1; 1Boston College — Many

studies have examined the ERPs elicited by episodic memory however less
is known about the ERPs associated with emotional memory, particularly
for neutral memoranda previously encoded in an emotional context. In the
current experiment participants studied neutral nouns simultaneously with
a positive, negative or neutral image. After a brief retention interval participants completed a remember, know, guessing or new judgment to old
and new nouns. Importantly, the emotional context previously paired with
words at encoding was not re-presented at retrieval. Old-new effects were
strongest in fronto-central and central-parietal regions between 600 and
800 ms post stimulus onset. When examining effects of previous emotional
context within these electrodes and time period, ERPs elicited by correctly
recognized words learned in a negative or positive context became more

Poster Session E
positive-going, particularly in the left fronto-central electrodes. ERPs elicited by hits previously associated with a neutral context do not show this
same pattern. The results suggest that even when retrieval cues are neutral,
there are residual effects of valence that influence retrieval and ERPs.

E89
ELECTRICAL STIMULATION OF DORSOLATERAL PREFRONTAL
CORTEX AT RETRIEVAL INCREASES EPISODIC RECOLLECTION
ACCURACY Stephen Gray1, Geoffrey Brookshire1, Daniel Casasanto1, David
Gallo1; 1The University of Chicago — Neuroimaging studies show dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) is activated during recollection. Here, we used
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to test whether dlPFC is causally involved in recollection by administering anodal tDCS to left or right
dlPFC just prior to recollection tests. In all conditions, participants first
studied a list of words, with some words associated with a red font, some
words associated with a corresponding picture of the object, and some
words associated with both formats. Following this study phase, participants in the electrical stimulation conditions received tDCS to either left or
right dlPFC, whereas participants in the no-stimulation control conditions
received a sham (placebo) procedure. All participants then took a series
of criterial recollection tests, whereby words were presented as retrieval
cues and participants needed to recollect the associated study format (e.g.,
“Was this item studied in red font?” on the Font Test, or “Was this item
studied with a picture?” on the Picture Test). Replicating behavioral work,
recollection accuracy was greater when tested for pictures than font color,
demonstrating a distinctiveness effect on recollection accuracy. Critically,
stimulation of dlPFC significantly boosted recollection accuracy for font
color relative to sham, but did not affect picture recollection. The overall effect of stimulation laterality was not significant. Thus, stimulation
boosted recollection accuracy when the to-be-remembered information was
relatively nondistinctive and hence difficult to retrieve. These brain stimulation results extend previous fMRI results with this task, providing some
of the first evidence that dlPFC plays a causal role in episodic recollection.

E90
THE RELATION BETWEEN SPATIAL AND AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORY IN PEOPLE WITH MEDIAL OR POSTERIOR TEMPORAL
LOBE DAMAGE Jessica Robin1,2, Josée Rivest3,4, R. Shayna Rosenbaum2,5,
Morris Moscovitch1,2,3; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital, 3Psychology Department, Baycrest Hospital, 4Glendon College,
York University, 5York University — The hippocampus has long been associated
with both spatial (O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978) and episodic (Scoville & Milner,
1957) memory. Some theorize that it is necessary for the spatial (O’Keefe &
Nadel, 1978), or relational (Eichenbaum & Cohen, 2014) aspects of memory
representations, while others state that it is not necessary once the memories
become remote (i.e. very old; Zola-Morgan & Squire, 1990). We studied the
retrieval of spatial and autobiographical (i.e. personal, episodic) memory
based on remotely known real-world locations in individuals with global
amnesia relating to medial temporal lobe (MTL) damage, including the
hippocampus. The MTL group’s performance was compared to that of an
individual whose memory was relatively preserved but had topographical
disorientation resulting in an inability to navigate in both new and familiar
places, relating to more posterior ventral temporal lobe damage. Compared
to controls, all were impaired in memory for detailed representations of
remote spatial scenes and autobiographical episodes. However, individuals with MTL damage performed more poorly on the autobiographical
task than the individual with ventral temporal lobe damage. No one was
impaired at a task requiring comparison of coarse spatial relations between
remotely known locations when named verbally, indicating that remote,
schematic spatial memories are spared following hippocampal and posterior temporal damage. Together, the results suggest that structures, such
as the hippocampus, and possibly the posterior temporal cortex, support
detail-rich spatial representations and are also needed for detailed autobiographical memory (Winocur & Moscovitch, 2011).

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

165

Poster Session E

E91
TMS OVER THE FRONTAL EYE FIELD AFFECTS MEMORY RECALL
Andrea L Wantz1,2, Corinna S Martarelli1,2, Dario Cazzoli3, Roger Kalla4, René
Müri2,4, Fred W Mast1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Bern, 2Center
for Cognition, Learning and Memory, University of Bern, 3ARTORG Center for Biomedical Engineering Research, University of Bern, 4Department of Neurology,
University Hospital Bern — Scene memory consists of objects and spatial information about their location. Recently, it has been demonstrated that eye
movements are especially important for the retrieval of location compared
to object information (Johansson & Johansson, 2014). Spatial memory performance declined when participants’ gaze during recall was restricted to
an area that was incongruent to the area where the stimuli were encoded.
It has been concluded that eye movements are functionally involved in
memory recall. However, it remains open whether the results are caused
by a spatial mismatch during encoding and recall or whether oculomotor
mechanisms underlie the change in performance. The right frontal eye
field (FEF) is a key structure in the cortical representation of the oculomotor system. Thus, in order to manipulate the activity of this key oculomotor area directly, we used a temporary interference approach by means of
inhibitory transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) over the right FEF and
studied its influence on short- and long-term recall of object and location
information in a scene context. Participants encoded a complex scene and
performed a retrieval task either immediately after encoding or after 24h
(between-design). Before recall was tested, half of the sample received TMS
over the right FEF, the other half received sham stimulation. Preliminary
analyses (n = 49) suggest that oculomotor mechanisms are functionally
involved in long-term memory recall, especially for object information.

E92
COMMON AND DISTINCT NEURAL NETWORKS UNDERLYING
VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY EPISODIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL
Shana Hall1, Dawei Li1, Banafsheh Sharif-Askary2, Phillip Kragel1, Minkung
Hong1, Katherine Zhu1, Roberto Cabeza1, David Rubin1, Dorthe Berntsen3; 1Duke
University, 2National Institute of Health, 3Aarhus University — Involuntary mem-

ories, memories that occur without the intent to retrieve, commonly occur
in all individuals and play an important role in mental disorders such as
post-traumatic stress disorder. Both voluntary and involuntary memories
are associated with activity in the default mode network (DMN), specifically
parahippocampal gyrus, inferior parietal cortex, precuneus, and posterior
midline regions. Voluntary memories show greater activity than involuntary memories in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), a region associated with retrieval effort. In the current study in which we analyzed fMRI
activity during involuntary and voluntary memory retrieval, we predicted
that regions showing similar activity across memory type would also show
similar profiles of connectivity and that voluntary memories alone would
elicit increased connectivity between the left DLPFC and DMN regions.
We used independent component analysis to determine similarities and
differences in functional connectivity between voluntary and involuntary
retrieval. We found a component common to both memory types that
included the regions from the DMN. Also included in this component
were regions within lateral and medial prefrontal cortex. We also found a
component related only to voluntary memories that included left DLPFC,
as well as the DMN regions. The overlap between the two components
included DMN regions and lateral PFC. However, the overlap within lateral PFC did not contain the left DLPFC region previously associated with
voluntary memory retrieval. This indicates that there is a common network
engaged during voluntary and involuntary memories and there is a separate network associated with voluntary memories that includes DLPFC.

E93
RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF THE PRECUNEUS AND HIPPOCAMPUS IS DIFFERENTIALLY RELATED TO
MENTAL ROTATION AND EPISODIC MEMORY PERFORMANCE
IN MEN AND WOMEN Eva Stening1, Jonas Persson1, Hedvig Söderlund1;
1
Uppsala University, Sweden — Earlier research has identified associations
between resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) and cognitive performance. Some cognitive functions, such as mental rotation and episodic
memory, show consistent sex differences. The precuneus is an important

166

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
structure for visual imagery, and whereas mental rotation typically activates the precuneus, episodic memory often co-activates the hippocampus
and the precuneus. The aim of the present study was to assess whether
the way the rsFC of these regions relates to mental rotation and episodic
memory performance differs between men and women. We found indeed
different patterns for men and women in how rsFC within and between
these two regions related to mental rotation and episodic memory performance. Intraregional precuneal rsFC was related to mental rotation performance in men only, while intraregional hippocampal rsFC was related to
episodic memory performance in women only. Interregional rsFC between
the hippocampus and precuneus was related to performance in both tasks
in men, but not in women. Our findings demonstrate a sex difference in
how rsFC between the precuneus and hippocampus relates to performance.
The fact that precuneal-hippocampal rsFC relates to both spatial and episodic performance in men but not in women could indicate that men benefit from an intrinsic hippocampus-precuneus circuit when processing
episodic memory and that their episodic memory is possibly more spatial
in nature. Taken together, these findings also show that sex differences in
rsFC mirrors, and can perhaps help explain, sex differences in cognitive
performance.

E94
PATTERN SEPARATION IN ANXIETY DISORDERS Daniel Bjornn1,
Brigham Wright1, Shawn Gale1, Brock Kirwan1; 1Brigham Young University —
Individuals with an anxiety disorder suffer from persistent worry that can
cause significant impairment in everyday life. These worries may come
about because of overgeneralization, which several theorists propose may
be due to deficits in pattern separation. Pattern separation is the computational process of orthogonalizing potentially overlapping stimuli to avoid
interference in storing and retrieving memory representations. In order to
test the hypothesis that pattern separation deficits underlie anxiety disorders, we collected data using a recognition memory task with high pattern
separation demands. Data were analyzed from 58 individuals (27 anxiety,
31 control). Previous diagnoses of anxiety disorders were confirmed using
the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview. Individuals were presented pictures of every-day objects one at a time on a computer screen and
were asked to indicate whether the image was repeated, similar to one they
had seen before, or new to the study. Anxiety symptom ratings confirmed
group assignments. No significant difference was found between groups
on mnemonic specificity performance, suggesting that anxiety is not characterized by pervasive pattern separation deficits. The present study examined anxiety disorders as a whole. Further research may help to determine
whether specific anxiety disorders (such as post-traumatic stress disorder)
show deficits in this process. The use of emotionally salient stimuli may
also shed further light on the subject since the present task used images of
everyday objects.

E95
CONSERVATIVE RESPONSE BIAS AND THE SUCCESSFUL
MEMORY EFFECT IN RECOGNITION: AN EEG INVESTIGATION Misty
Schubert1, Justin Kantner2, Jean Vettel3,1, Benjamin Turner1, Thomas Bullock1,
Jeanne Li1, James Elliot1, Barry Giesbrecht1, Michael Miller1; 1University of California, Santa Barbara, 2Washington University in St. Louis, 3U.S. Army Research
Lab — The successful retrieval effect in recognition memory refers to an

increased neural response to items correctly called “old” relative to items
correctly called “new.” fMRI studies implicate regions of lateral prefrontal
and parietal cortex in successful retrieval, but recent work suggests that
these regions are also active when participants set a conservative decision
criterion, requiring a greater amount of memory evidence before test items
are called “old”. If a strict criterion drives brain activity rather than successful retrieval, a “successful retrieval effect” should be observed even when
available memory evidence is completely non-diagnostic of old-new status,
as long as participants maintain a conservative criterion. We tested this
prediction in an EEG study, measuring the mid-frontal old/new (FN400)
effect, an ERP component of successful recognition (hits > CRs) that is
increased under conservative criterion conditions and is typically observed
in experiments with medium-to-high levels of d’. In our paradigm, old-new
discrimination (d’) was close to chance and response criterion was manipulated by instruction. Contrary to our hypothesis, we obtained the FN400
in neither the conservative nor the liberal response conditions. In a subse-

2015 Annual Meeting
quent experiment, we manipulated d’ within-subjects and found a successful retrieval effect when d’ was modestly above chance (M = .67) but not
when d’ was near chance (M = .09). These results indicate that although the
neural correlates of successful memory and response conservatism overlap substantially, at least some amount of diagnostic memory evidence is
required before an ERP successful memory effect will be observed.

E96
MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN SIMILARITY PREDICTS GIST-BASED
FALSE RECOGNITION IN A DRM PARADIGM Lucas Jenkins1, Hannula Deborah1; 1University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee — When participants in a

typical Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) experiment are asked to study
lists of semantically related words (e.g., bed, dream, nap, pillow, snooze),
they show a strong tendency to falsely recognize semantically related lures
(e.g., sleep). Indeed, the false alarm rate for related lures is often equal to
or greater than the hit rate for words that were actually studied. One explanation for this false memory effect is that participants encode an abstract
representation of the similarities among list words – a gist representation
– during study. Related lures are incorrectly endorsed as “old” at test, it is
argued, because they are consistent with the encoded gist representation.
Here, we use fMRI multivariate statistical analyses to determine whether
similarities among the activation patterns associated with semantically
related words during encoding predict false recognition of semantically
related lures. Participants were scanned while encoding lists of words containing five groups of five semantically related words presented in random
order. During a subsequent test, participants were presented with studied
words and unstudied lures that were semantically related to one of the
previously studied word groups. We predicted that regions supporting
gist-based false recognition would exhibit greater pattern similarity among
words related to falsely recognized lures than among words related to
correctly rejected lures. Preliminary data finds evidence for this pattern of
results in anterior and medial temporal regions.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other
E97
MEMORY COMPRESSION AND MENTAL SPACE TRAVEL: COMPRESSION VARIES WITH ROUTE LENGTH Kyra McKelvey1,2, Joseph
Blommesteyn1, Morris Moscovitch1,2; 1University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada,
Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, Canada — In rodents,

2

the compressed replay of hippocampal firing patterns has been suggested
to underlie consolidation and recall of spatial memories. Since the hippocampus is also thought to support spatial memory in humans, our goal
was to investigate such compression and replay of spatial information in
people. In this study we asked participants to use their imaginations to navigate well-known routes around the University of Toronto campus, while
we recorded how long it took to mentally travel each route. Afterwards,
participants rated their familiarity with the routes, as well as the level of
detail they recalled, and their ‘presence’ during mental navigation. We
found that the compression of routes in memory (a factor found by dividing the actual time it would take to walk each route over the time it took
each participant to mentally navigate the route), was strongly correlated
with route length, but unaffected by familiarity, detail, or presence. This
correlation between route length and a behavioural measure of compression corresponds well to results in the rodent literature that find a correlation between route length and neural compression. We propose that such
compression of information also occurs for episodic event memory. More
generally, compression may be critical for memory consolidation through
spike-dependent plasticity, as well as the organization of information in
memory. Thus, compression may support not only efficient navigation, but
also recollection, planning, imagination, and problem solving.

E98
HIGH CONFLICT DURING A NOVEL APPROACH-AVOIDANCE
TASK IS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED HUMAN HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVITY. Edward B O’Neil1, Iris H Li1, Rachel N Newsome1, Sathesan
Thavabalasingam1, Rutsuko Ito1, Andy C H Lee1,2; 1University of Toronto, 2Rotman
Research Institute — Recent theories suggest that the anterior hippocampus

Poster Session E
resolves approach-avoidance conflict. Extant data in support of this view
are limited, however, and past findings are confounded by mnemonic or
spatial factors known to impact hippocampal processing. To address this,
we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate hippocampal involvement during a novel approach-avoidance paradigm.
Participants repeatedly viewed a set of scene-face pairs during a pre-scanning contingency acquisition phase. Following each presentation, participants indicated an approach or avoid response and a running score was
displayed, increasing when ‘positive’-designated pairs were approached,
or decreasing when ‘negative’-designated pairs were approached. Scores
remained unchanged if the alternate response was selected. During scanning, previously shown items were presented in novel pairings without
feedback. Critically, some pairings were comprised of items from both
positive and negative trials (mixed pairs) leading to high conflict. Behavioral performance indicated that this manipulation was effective: participants approached ‘positive’ and avoided ‘negative’ pairings at test, and
responses to ambiguous mixed pairs reflected conflict in terms of longer
reaction times and a tendency to respond in a varied manner. Data-driven
analysis of the fMRI data using multivariate partial least squares revealed
a reliable pattern of brain activity that differentiated high and low conflict
conditions. Greater involvement of a number of regions was observed
during high as compared to low conflict pairings, including the anterior
hippocampus, amygdala, and caudate. Our findings indicate that the
human anterior hippocampus contributes to approach-avoidance conflict
resolution even when mnemonic and spatial demands are controlled.

E99
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RECOGNITION MEMORY: RELATING THEORY, BEHAVIOR, AND NEURAL MEASURES Benjamin O.
Turner1, Elizabeth N. Davison2, Kimberly J. Schlesinger1, Mary-Ellen Lynall3, Scott
T. Grafton1, Jean M. Carlson1, Danielle S. Bassett4, Michael B. Miller1; 1University
of California, Santa Barbara, 2Princeton University, 3University of Oxford, 4University of Pennsylvania — It has previously been established that the degree

to which people are able to adaptively shift their criterion in recognition
memory experiments—for instance, to adopt a liberal or conservative
response bias based on task demands—varies widely across individuals. Moreover, this variability can be partially explained on the basis of a
number of individual difference factors, including demographics, state of
mind, cognitive style, and even personality (Aminoff et al., 2012). Our focus
here is twofold: first, we present additional analyses of these data (which
were collected during an fMRI experiment), demonstrating that differences
in patterns of neural activity can likewise be explained by individual difference factors (see, e.g., Miller et al., 2012); and critically for recognition
memory researchers, these differences relate to constructs such as d’ in
theoretically relevant ways. Second, in addition to standard GLM-derived
SPMs of task-related activity, we examined several graph-theoretic properties of these data, including a dynamic measure based on analyzing the
hypergraph structure of task functional connectivity. Our results demonstrate that there is information in these measures above and beyond more
traditional graph-theoretic or GLM-based metrics: that is, individual differences along all of these dimensions—hypergraph measures, more traditional functional connectivity measures, GLM results, and behavioral
and personality factors—all carry unique information, and all can inform
our understanding of the mechanisms underlying recognition memory
performance. In particular, any attempt to relate brain regions to cognitive
processes must consider the broader individual context. This research was
supported by the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies under grant
W911NF-09-D-0001.

E100
DIFFERENTIAL NEURAL NETWORK CONFIGURATION DURING
VISUAL PATH INTEGRATION IN HUMANS Aiden Arnold1,2,3, Ford
Burles1,2, Signe Bray1, Richard M Levy1, Giuseppe Iaria1,2; 1University of Calgary,
Hotchkiss Brain Institute, 3University of California, Davis — Path integration is

2

a fundamental skill for navigation in both humans and animals. Despite
recent advances in unraveling the neural basis of path integration in animals, little is known about how it operates at a neural level in humans. Previous attempts to characterize the neural mechanisms used by humans to
visually path integrate suggest a central role of the hippocampus, broadly
resembling results from animal data. However, in recent years both the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

167

Poster Session E
central role of the hippocampus and the perspective that animals and
humans share similar neural mechanisms for path integration has come
into question. This study used a data driven partial least squares analysis
to investigate the neural systems engaged during visual path integration
in humans. Our results suggest that humans employ common task control,
attention and spatial working memory systems distributed across a frontoparietal network during path integration. However, individuals differed in
how these systems configured into functional networks. High performing
individuals more broadly expressed spatial working memory systems in
prefrontal cortex, while low performing individuals engaged an allocentric
memory system in medial occipito-temporal regions. These findings suggest that visual path integration in humans can operate through a spatial
working memory system engaging primarily the prefrontal cortex and that
the differential configuration of memory systems coupled with task control
networks may help explain individual biases in spatial memory. Additionally, our results show that visual path integration in humans may not rely
on the hippocampus, but rather be best explained through the topological
configuration of functional networks.

E101
HIPPOCAMPAL AND STRIATAL MEMORY IMPLICITLY FACILITATE VISUAL SEARCH Elizabeth V. Goldfarb1, Marvin M. Chun2, Elizabeth A.
Phelps1; 1New York University, 2Yale University — We developed a novel task to
concurrently measure the implicit contributions of multiple memory systems. In this visual search task, both spatial context (an index for hippocampal memory) and stimulus-response cues (S-R, designed to measure
striatal memory) significantly and implicitly facilitate performance. Participants showed significantly faster reaction times on Context or S-R cued
trials compared to Uncued (baseline) trials but have no explicit memory
for these associations. Our fMRI data support our hypothesis that memory
for these cues relies on distinct neural systems. We anatomically defined a
priori hippocampal and striatal (caudate and putamen) regions of interest
in each subject and examined contrasts between Context vs Uncued as well
as S-R vs Uncued trials. When comparing Context vs Uncued activity, the
amount of hippocampal activity in the first half of the experiment predicted
the extent to which participants were faster on Context search trials in the
second half. Contextually cued search did not correlate with early striatal
activity. For S-R learning, the amount of striatal activity on S-R v Uncued
trials in the second half of the experiment correlated with the extent to
which participants were faster on S-R trials in the second half, while hippocampal activity did not. This task provides an ideal framework to study
factors that differentially impact multiple memory systems.

METHODS: Neuroimaging
E102
STABILITY OF THE FMRI BOLD SIGNAL IN READING DISABILITY:
INSIGHTS WE CAN GAIN FROM BETA SERIES ANALYSIS Anish
Kurian1,2, W. Einar Mencl1,3, Jeffrey Malins1, Brian A. Parbhu1, Peter Molfese1,2,
Bryan Cort1, Stephen J. Frost1, Kenneth R. Pugh1,2,3; 1Haskins Laboratories, New
Haven, CT, 2University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 3Yale University, New Haven, CT
— We explored individual differences in the stability of the BOLD response
and how these stability differences correlated with performance on behavioral measures of reading and language skill. This study (N=27) applied
a novel analysis technique to a previously published study (Pugh et al.,
2008), which examined the effects of repetition on printed word identification. Participants saw words on a screen (repeated 1-6 times) and had
to make an animacy judgment by button press. The initial report suggested a disordinal pattern of activation between non-impaired (NI) and
reading disabled (RD) individuals as the number of repetitions increased.
In the current study, we focused on the variability of the BOLD response
(the standard deviation of beta values on a trial to trial basis within the
same condition) and used this measure as an index of trial-wise stability.
We correlated the standard deviation (SD) of the beta-weights with behavioral data and identified significant correlations between BOLD response
variability and language skills. Specifically, we observed strong negative
correlations in putamen and thalamus between BOLD response variability and language performance. The correlations in putamen and thalamus
compared SD and WJ Spelling (r= -0.53, p < 0.01; r= -0.50, p <0.01; respec-

168

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
tively) as well as SD and an overall reading composite score (r= -0.50, p
<0.01 for thalamus). These findings provide further insight on how instability in the BOLD response may help better quantify what has been referred
to as a “noisy brain” in those individuals with RD when being compared
to their NI peers.

E103
SIMULTANEOUS MULTI-SLICE/MULTIBAND ACQUISITION
ALLOWS WHOLE-BRAIN, SUB-SECOND DATA COLLECTION
WITH LITTLE COST FOR TASK-EVOKED FMRI STUDIES Stephanie
McMains1, R. Matthew Hutchison1,2, Ross Mair1,2; 1Harvard University, 2Massachusetts General Hospital — Slice-accelerated EPI using multiband (MB)

RF pulses that allow for simultaneous multi-slice (SMS) acquisition of
BOLD images can significantly enhance the temporal and spatial resolution of fMRI by acquiring up to 8 non-contiguous slices simultaneously,
thus enabling whole-brain sub-second TRs. Here we studied visual cortex
response at a variety of MB accelerations and TR reductions to investigate
costs associated with whole-brain, sub-second data collection. 6 subjects
were scanned (3.0T Siemens Tim Trio) while blocks of flashing checkerboards were presented to alternating visual fields. BOLD scans were
acquired at 3mm and 2mm isotropic resolutions, and MB accelerations of 0
(conventional BOLD), 1, 4 and 8 (Siemens WIP 770A). Beta and t-statistics
were extracted from visual cortex. TR= 3.0/1.25/0.75/0.7s, allowing acquisition of 91/184/307/328 timepoints. There were no significant differences
in betas for any parameters, or in t-statistics for levels of MB when holding
the TR constant. Shortening the TR increased t-statistics significantly. This
advantage was reduced when temporal autocorrelations in the noise were
modeled. An event-related study was also conducted to compare 3s TR
(MB1) versus 750ms TR (MB8). Betas were larger for the MB8 scans, likely
due to improved characterization of the hemodynamic response, even
though stimulus onset was jittered to the TR. The results suggest that whole
brain coverage with high spatial and temporal resolution can be achieved
using SMS with little to no significant cost in terms of BOLD signal sensitivity, as measured by betas and t-statistics, even though time-series SNR was
significantly decreased at high MB factors.

E104
DOES SNR OF VISUALLY EVOKED BOLD RESPONSES CHANGE
WITH RAPID MULTIPLEXED FMRI? Peter J. Kohler1, Anthony M. Norcia1;
1
Stanford University — Multiplexed fMRI allows for sub-second acquisitions
of whole-brain images (Feinberg, 2010), much faster than standard fMRI
protocols. What happens to the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of fMRI BOLD
responses as acquisitions get faster? We address this question by showing
participants a flickering grating undergoing periodic contrast modulation,
while acquiring multiplexed fMRI. This protocol yields a direct measure
of a stimulus-evoked BOLD response (unlike resting-state-based measures
of data quality, e.g. Smith et al. 2013). Stimulus frequency and acquisition rate were varied independently. SNR was quantified using spectral
analysis as the ratio of the response amplitude at the stimulus frequency
to the non-stimulus-related background at neighboring frequencies. Our
first experiment used a stimulus period of 24s, combined with four different multiplexing factors that yielded TRs of 2000ms, 1200ms, 800ms and
400ms. SNR did not change with different TRs, and there was no interaction between TR and region-of-interest in retinotopic visual cortex,
although there was a main effect of region-of-interest. In our second experiment, we looked for an interaction between stimulus frequency and TR.
We used TRs of 2000ms and 400ms to sample the response to the stimulus modulating over 12s, 8s and 6s periods. We again found little effect of
TR on SNR, except that 400ms acquisitions tended to yield better SNR at
the fastest stimulus frequency. These results demonstrate that, at least for
visually evoked BOLD-responses, SNR does not decrease when acquiring
multiplexed sub-second fMRI, and fast acquisitions may in fact yield higher
SNR at fast stimulus modulations.

E105
THE NEUROIMAGING INFORMATICS TOOLS AND RESOURCES
CLEARINGHOUSE (NITRC) Christian Haselgrove1, Robert Buccigrossi2,
David Kennedy1, Nina Preuss2, Jon Riehl3, Giorgio Ascoli4, David Boas5, Steven
Bressler6, Arnaud Delorme7, Randy Gollub5, Li Shen8; 1University of Massachu-

2015 Annual Meeting
setts Medical School, 2Turner Consulting Group, Inc, 3Resilient Science, 4George
Mason University, 5Harvard Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital,
6
Florida Atlantic University, 7University of California, San Diego, 8Indiana University — We report on the use and continued development of the Neuro-

imaging Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC; www.
nitrc.org), a neuroimaging informatics knowledge environment for MR,
PET/SPECT, CT, EEG/MEG, optical imaging, genetics/genomics imaging,
and clinical neuroinformatics. Initiated in October 2006 through the NIH
Blueprint for Neuroscience Research, NITRC’s mission is to foster a userfriendly knowledge environment for the neuroinformatics community.
NITRC is centered around the Resource Repository (NITRC-R), an on-line
catalog of software tools and other resources valuable to the community.
NITRC-R promotes software, vocabularies, test data, databases, communities, and other resources, thereby extending the impact of previously
funded neuroimaging informatics contributions to a broader community.
NITRC’s Image Repository (NITRC-IR) hosts raw and processed data to
facilitate data sharing. Its structured database allows for downloading
cross-sections of data for analysis, meta-analysis, and validation of techniques, and other uses. NITRC-IR hosts 12 community-generated data sets
(as of November, 2014) and continues to grow. NITRC’s Computational
Environment (NITRC-CE) is a cloud-based, standard environment for
neuroimaging computation. Built on NeuroDebian and available through
Amazon Web Services and Microsoft Azure, NITRC-CE provides readyto-use environment for data analysis. It has been successfully used by both
small studies with a few subjects and by large efforts with thousands of
data sets to analyze. Together, NITRC-R, -IR, and -CE are an established
and trusted environment serving a number of needs of the neuroimaging
community.

E106
ACTIVATION OF SELECTED BRAIN REGIONS CORRELATES WITH
HUNGER SUBSCALE OF THREE FACTOR EATING QUESTIONNAIRE Laura Gramling1, Katherine Flemming1, Aaron D Jacobson1, Nobuko
Kemmotsu2, Erin Green3, Lori Haase3, Claire Murphy1,2,3; 1San Diego State University, 2University of California San Diego, 3SDSU/UCSD Joint Doctoral Program
— Obesity has become a worldwide epidemic. We investigated dimensions

of eating behavior measured by the Three Factor Eating Questionnaire
(TFEQ), which measures cognitive restraint of eating, disinhibition, and
hunger. Participants (N = 85) were divided into control (n = 45) or metabolic syndrome (MetS) (n =40) groups. Participants were assigned to the
MetS group if they met three of seven cardiovascular risk factors outlined
by the International Diabetes Federation. Participants were administered
the TFEQ and completed two fMRI scans. Before each scan participants
fasted, and completed one scan hungry and one scan sated, after a preload. Participants rated the pleasantness of aqueous solutions of sucrose,
saccharine and caffeine during the scan; water was used as a rinse and
baseline comparison. Correlations were run on participants’ TFEQ hunger
subscale and activation levels of specific brain regions known to be affected
by taste, hunger and reward processes. When rating saccharine there was a
significant positive correlation between TFEQ hunger and activation in the
hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and parahippocampus during the hunger
condition, and in the entorhinal cortex and parahippocampus during the
satiety condition for middle-aged adults. In response to sucrose, there was
a significant positive correlation between hunger and activation in the hippocampus in the hunger condition and in the caudate and posterior cingulate in the satiety condition for middle-aged adults. These findings could
have implications for memory deficits in later life, due to hyper activation
in these regions. Supported by NIH grant # AG004085-26 from NIA to CM.

E107
MAPPING ABNORMAL SUBCORTICAL BRAIN MORPHOMETRY IN
AN ELDERLY HIV+ COHORT Benjamin Wade1, Victor Valcour2, Lauren Wendelken-Riegelhaupt2, Pardis Esmaeili-Firidouni2, Shantanu Joshi3, Yalin Wang4,
Paul Thompson1; 1Imaging Genetics Center, University of Southern California,
2
Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology University of California, San
Francisco, 3Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, Department of Neurology, University of California Los Angeles, 4School of Computing, Informatics, and

Poster Session E
Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University — Introduction: Over
50% of HIV+ individuals show cognitive impairment in psychomotor functioning, processing speed, working memory and attention. Patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy may still have subcortical atrophy,
but the profile of HIV-associated brain changes is poorly understood. It is
important to develop biomarkers to track viral effects on the brain. With
surface-based shape analyses, we mapped the 3D profile of subcortical
morphometry in 63 elderly HIV+ subjects (4 female; age=65.35± 2.21) and
31 uninfected elderly controls (2 female; age=64.68 ± 4.57) scanned with
MRI as part of the UCSF HIV Over 60 Cohort study. We additionally investigated an association of morphometry with nadir CD4 counts and illness
duration. Methods: The thalamus, corpus striatum, hippocampus, amygdala, brainstem, callosum and ventricles were segmented from brain MRI
scans using FreeSurfer. To study subcortical shape, we analyzed: (1) the
Jacobian determinant (JD; a measure of surface shrinkage) indexed over
structures’ surface coordinates and (2) radial distances (RD) of structure
surfaces from a medial curve. A JD less than 1 reflects regional tissue atrophy and greater than 1 reflects expansion. Results: RD maps revealed atrophy of the left thalamus in HIV+ participants and expansion of the cerebral
aqueduct. RD and JD maps of the right pallidum identified tissue expansion
associated with illness duration. Volumetrically, HIV+ participants showed
significant reduction of the bilateral thalami, left pallidum and corpus callosum along with enlarged left lateral and third ventricles. Conclusions:
Our results characterize the subcortical brain shape and regional volume
abnormalities in older HIV+ people.

E108
PCA-BASED AUTOMATIC SEGMENTATION OF HIPPOCAMPAL
LONGITUDINAL AXIS Garikoitz Lerma-Usabiaga1, Juan Eugenio Iglesias1,
Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1; 1BCBL. Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language — The human hippocampal formation is a crucial brain structure for

memory and cognitive function that is connected to other subcortical and
cortical brain regions. Recent neuroimaging studies have found differences
along the hippocampus longitudinal axis in terms of function, structure
and connectivity, stressing the importance of improving the precision of
the available segmentation methods typically used to divide it into anterior and posterior parts. Hereof, current segmentation conventions present
two main sources of variability related to how separating planes along the
longitudinal axis are chosen and how the in-scanner head position is corrected and equated across subjects. These issues are typically addressed
by manually aligning the brain for roll, pitch, and yaw rotations along the
inter-hemispheric fissure, AC-PC line and orbits. Here, we propose an
automated method based on estimating the longitudinal axis with principal component analysis (PCA). The estimated direction is used to define
the orientation of the separating planes, which removes the variability
associated with the manual alignment of the in-scanner brain position. The
output obtained with the PCA-based alignment was compared with the
segmentations given by manual alignments provided by two trained and
independent judges on a sample of 100 young adults. The results reveal
that the automatized procedure minimizes the inconsistencies generated by
the accumulation of manual operations, thus ensuring the reproducibility
of the results between different sites. The automatic method also provides
higher statistical power than the manual alignments when detecting wellknown effects. A Matlab implementation will be made publicly available.

E109
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN DISINHIBITION SUBSCALE OF THE
THREE FACTOR EATING QUESTIONNAIRE AND ACTIVATION OF
SELECTED BRAIN REGIONS Katherine Fleming1, Laura Gramling1, Aaron
D Jacobson1, Nobuko Kemmotsu2, Erin Green3, Lori Haase3, Murphy Claire1,2,3;
San Diego State University, 2University of California San Diego, 3SDSU/UCSD
Joint Doctoral Program — Worldwide, rates of obesity have reached epidemic
1

proportions, with numbers of obese adults expected to reach 700 million by
2015. Understanding the connection between eating behavior and neural
processes becomes paramount. The Three Factor Eating Questionnaire
(TFEQ) measures three dimensions of eating behavior – cognitive restraint
of eating, disinhibition, and hunger. The current study examined the correlation between participant disinhibition scores and activation in brain

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

169

Poster Session E
regions involved in taste and reward processing. Participants (N = 85) were
divided into control (n = 45) or metabolic syndrome (MetS) (n = 40) groups.
The MetS participants had three of seven risk factors for cardiovascular
disease and diabetes outlined by the International Diabetes Federation.
Participants were administered the TFEQ and completed two fMRI scans
on separate days. Before each scan participants fasted for 12 hours, and
completed one scan hungry and one scan satiated, after having consumed
a nutritional preload. Participants rated the pleasantness of aqueous solutions of sucrose, saccharine and caffeine during the scan; water was used as
a rinse and baseline comparison. Across age there was a significant positive
relationship between scores on the TFEQ disinhibition scale and activation
in the posterior cingulate in both control and MetS subjects for saccharine.
In MetS older adults there was a significant positive correlation between
disinhibition and activation in the parahippocampus when rating saccharine and sucrose. These results may have implications for obesity in middle
age as a risk factor for dementia. Supported by NIH grant # AG004085-26
from NIA to CM.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
E110
CORTICAL CONTROL OF VOCAL PITCH FEEDBACK Gottfried
Schlaug1, Charles Li1, Psyche Loui1,2, Gus Halwani1, Frank Guenther3; 1Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical School, 2Wesleyan University,
3
Boston University — Speaking and singing require rapid and automatic cou-

pling between feedforward and feedback processes of the auditory-motor
system, but the critical regions of this brain network remain unclear. Here
we investigated neural sensitivity to pitch-shifted auditory feedback in a
combined behavioral and sparse-temporal sampled fMRI study using 19
non-musicians. Auditory feedback was perturbed in randomly selected
trials by shifting the participants’ (n = 19) vocal pitch by 1 and 2 semitones
(ST) in either direction while participants were performing a pitch-matching task. Behavioral recordings of vocal pitch production showed that
participants compensated for the ±1ST perturbations by varying their F0
production in the direction opposite to the experimental manipulation, and
while responses to the ±2ST perturbations seemed to vary more between
compensation and a pitch following behavior (i.e., they varied their production in the same direction as the perturbation). Functional MRI for all
production compared to no production conditions showed a vocal-motor
network including feedback and feedforward sensorimotor integration and
control regions, while the 1ST vs. non-perturbed contrast revealed a network that included left superior temporal sulcus (STS), planum temporale
(PT), premotor cortex (PMC), ventral motor cortex (vMC), supplementary
motor area (SMA), and right Heschl’s gyrus (HG). The 2ST vs. non-perturbed contrast, however, only showed activation in the SMA. Results
implicate a network of auditory, motor, and auditory-motor integration
regions in controlling vocal pitch feedback with the posterior ventral premotor cortex emerging as a nodal point of this network, while the SMA
may be more involved in vocal-motor matching behavior.

E111
EFFECTS OF SHORT-TERM CYCLING EXERCISE ON FUNCTIONAL
MEASURES OF AGING RELATED CHANGES IN UPPER EXTREMITY FUNCTION. Keith McGregor1,2, Joe Nocera1,2, Bruce Crosson1,2, Andrew
Butler1,3; 1Atlanta VA Medical Center - Center for Visual and Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, 2Emory University, 3Georgia State University — Aerobic fitness has
long been associated with better upper extremity function (Spirduso, 1975),
yet the neural changes largely responsible for these improvements are not
well understood. It has been proposed that alteration of inhibitory systems
in the cortex have strong effect on plasticity in aging and regular aerobic
exercise may be prophylactic in preventing aging-related changes in cortical inhibition (McGregor et al., 2013). In the current study, we enrolled sedentary older adults (60 years+) in a short-term (12-week) exercise program
to explore if improvements in aerobic capacity alter upper extremity motor
control. We evaluated changes in neural activity using transcranial magnetic stimulation. Participants improved estimates of VO2max by 10-15%
on average as a result of the aerobic exercise intervention. Preliminary
results show behavioral improvements in affective, cognitive and motor

170

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
dexterity measures as a result of the exercise intervention. Pre/Post session
TMS results indicate an increase in interhemispheric inhibition, though
additional data analysis is required.

E112
NEURAL RESPONSES DURING SPEECH PRODUCTION AT VOCALIZATION ONSET DEMONSTRATE CORTICAL SELF-MONITORING.
Naomi Kort1, Maria Ventura1, John Houde1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of
California, San Francisco — The act of speaking is accompanied by concur-

rent sensory consequences- somatosensory feedback associated with the
movement of articulators, and auditory feedback resulting from the movement, but the neural correlates of the monitoring of this sensory feedback
are complex and not well understood. In this study, we examined cortical
monitoring of self-produced vocalizations in human subjects across the
cortex and frequency bands using magnetoencephalography. Past studies
have implied suppression of activity in sensory areas is indicative of this
monitoring. But for suppression to represent self-monitoring, the suppression should be reduced in the presence of a feedback error. In this study, we
have shown neural responses were suppressed to self-produced vocalizations in bilateral temporal lobes, frontal and cerebellar regions. The largest
extent and greatest magnitude of suppression was in the beta band. When
the pitch of the auditory feedback was altered during speaking, creating a
feedback error, the suppression was reduced and in some regions eliminated. This reduction of suppression was driven by increased cortical activity during speaking with altered auditory feedback. The cortical network
showing increased activity during speaking with altered auditory feedback
was modulated with the amount of deviation in the perceived auditory
feedback from the expected auditory feedback. This study shows that suppression during vocalization contributes to cortical self-monitoring that is
sensitive to single features of the auditory signal.

E113
FUNCTIONAL MANIPULABILITY OF OBJECTS INTERACTS WITH
MOTOR PROCESSING INSTRUCTIONS: A BETWEEN-SUBJECTS
EEG STUDY Christopher Madan1, Yvonne Chen1, Anthony Singhal1; 1University of Alberta — An object’s motor-related properties can influence later

memory of the object, particularly when motor aspects of the object were
not intentionally attended-to. To better understand this effect we recorded
electroencephalography (EEG) while participants made judgments about
images of objects that were either high or low in functional manipulability
(e.g., violin vs. vase). Using a between-subjects design, participants judged
the objects on whether they (a) could manipulate the object using their
hand (Functionality group; N=31) or (b) have seen the object in the past
three days (Personal Experience group; N=30). We found main effects of
MANIPULABILITY and GROUP on the ERP waveforms at electrodes C3
and CPz, respectively. Since C3 is situated above the contralateral hand-region of M1, this waveform difference converges with findings of differential M1 activation due to manipulability in fMRI studies. We additionally observed an interaction of MANIPULABILITY (high/low) x GROUP
(personal experience/functionality) in the P300 amplitude at CPz. Here
we found a significantly greater P300 for low-manipulability images, but
only in the Functionality group. As P300 is thought to index attentional
recruitment, greater P300 for low-manipulability images suggests that they
may have received more attention when being processed, but only in the
Functionality group. This differential recruitment of attention may have
also played an important role in effects of manipulability on memory. This
significant interaction provides neural evidence that effects of manipulability on stimulus processing are further mediated by task requirements on
automatic vs. deliberate motor-related processing.

E114
HOW TO EXPLAIN INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY IN SPEECH MOTOR
CONTROL Clara Martin1,2, Caroline Niziolek3, Jon Andoni Duñabeitia1, Manuel
Carreiras1,2, John Houde3; 1BCBL. Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, San Sebastian, Spain, 2IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
Spain, 3UCSF, San Francisco, USA — When a speaker’s auditory feedback is

altered, he compensates for the perturbation by altering his own production, which demonstrates the role of auditory feedback in speech motor
control. In the present study, we explored the role of hearing competence

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E

and executive control in this process. Thirty two Spanish native speakers
performed (1) an altered feedback adaptation experiment, (2) executive
control (Stroop, Simon and Flanker) tasks, and (3) hearing competence tasks
(loudness, pitch and auditory pattern discrimination). (1) In the adaptation
experiment, subjects had to produce the pseudoword “pep” while perceiving their auditory feedback in real time through earphones. The auditory
feedback was first unaltered and then progressively altered in F1 and F2
dimensions until maximal alteration (F1 -150 Hz; F2 +300 Hz). The normalized distance of maximal adaptation ranged from 3 to 138 Hz (averaged
of 77 ±35). (2) Individual measures of inhibition of conflicting information
capacities (obtained from the executive control tasks) did not correlate with
adaptation. (3) Additionally, adaptation highly correlated with each individual score of hearing competence: Better auditory discriminators compensated more to the alteration. We concluded that speech motor control
depends on hearing competence but not on executive control capacities.
Being good at inhibiting conflicting information does not make participants
better at dealing with conflicting altered feedback. This reveals that participants compensate to altered feedback and do not inhibit it. Moreover, being
good at auditory discrimination makes participants better at detecting the
altered auditory feedback, leading to a larger adaptation.

and after equivalent control time periods, using both measures of cortical
thickness and Voxel Based Morphometry (VBM). As expected, participants
showed strong training effects in terms of reaction time and accuracy.
Though longitudinal analysis of both cortical thickness and VBM data suggested apparent changes in brain structure, these changes were not specific
to task-relevant regions. These findings suggest that the robust and specific
behavioral training effects were not matched by similarly robust and specific changes in measures of structural properties.

E115
FEEDBACK-RELATED NEGATIVITY PREDICTS ADAPTATION OF A
NEWLY LEARNED SKILL TO NOVEL TASK CONSTRAINTS Matthew

shown simultaneously but separately to each eye. Perceptual dominance
reverses over time with one image temporarily dominating perception
while the other is suppressed. Probes presented to the suppressed eye are
typically seen by participants and tend to cause perception to shift to the
suppressed-eye image. Here we ask what determines whether and how
quickly perception switches. We combine behavior and EEG (ERPs) to test
the hypotheses that 1) suppressed-eye probes elicit a shift in attention to
the suppressed-eye image and 2) the degree to which probes are processed
influences how rapidly perception switches. We find that suppressed-eye
probes elicit larger N1 and P3b activity relative to dominant-eye probes,
suggesting that suppressed-eye probes draw attention to the image in the
suppressed-eye. A comparison of suppressed-eye probe trials leading to
fast versus slow perceptual switches reveals two novel findings. First, single-trial P3b component amplitudes are negatively correlated with reversal
latency, such that as P3b amplitude increases, reversal latency decreases.
Second, probes presented to the suppressed eye at a moment in which
alpha power is low and at a peak (excitatory phase) are associated with
faster reversals than probes presented when alpha is high and at a trough
(inhibitory phase). Taken together, these results suggest that the level of
cortical excitability (indexed by the amplitude and phase of alpha) influences the probability that the probe attracts attention to the suppressed-eye
image, leading to a switch in perceptual dominance.

Miller1, Kirk Grand1, Alessandro Bruzi2, Ford Dyke1, Maurice Godwin1, Amber
Leiker1, Andrew Thompson1, Taylor Buchanan1, Marcos Daou1, Keith Lohse1;
1
Auburn University, 2Universidade Federal de Lavras — The feedback-related

negativity (FRN) component of the event-related potential (ERP) has been
associated with performance improvement in several motor learning paradigms, but never in a 24 h-delay-retention/transfer test paradigm, which
is the ‘gold standard’ of motor learning. To address this shortcoming, we
recorded electroencephalography from 28 right-handed participants using
their left arm to practice 60 beanbag tosses towards a target with a bull’s
eye 300 cm away. Participants’ view of the target was occluded, and they
received feedback after approximately two-thirds of their tosses (as part of
a larger study, half of the participants received feedback per their request,
and half received feedback at the experimenter’s discretion; results were
not significantly affected by whether participants controlled when they
received feedback). Feedback was presented on a computer monitor as a
rectangle, the color of which corresponded with how close participants’
tosses came to the target’s bull’s eye. FRN mean amplitude was derived
from ERPs time-locked to feedback onset. To index skill acquisition, participants resumed the study 24 h later and completed 12 ‘retention’ tosses
(from 300 cm) and 12 ‘transfer’ tosses (from 200 cm), all with no feedback.
Separate linear regressions revealed FRN amplitude predicted performance
on the transfer test (β = -.096, R2 = .263, p = .009), but not the retention
test (β = -.029, R2 = .012, p = .580). Results suggest that enhanced feedback
processing during the acquisition of a motor skill is associated with one’s
ability to adapt the newly learned skill to novel task constraints.

E116
EFFECTS OF SHORT- AND LONG-TERM MOTOR LEARNING ON
BRAIN STRUCTURE Aaron Trefler1, Cibu Thomas2, Elizabeth Aguila1, Carlos
Pierpaoli2, Chris I. Baker1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, NIMH, Bethesda,
MD, 2National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD
— A large number of studies have used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

to infer structural changes in the adult brain following training regimes
spanning from hours to weeks. However, the strength of the evidence from
these MRI-based studies is often limited, particularly with regard to the
specificity of any training effect on brain structure (Thomas and Baker,
2012). Here, we used a longitudinal within-subjects design to investigate
the topography of short-term (1 hour) and long-term (1 hour/day for 1
week) training-dependent structural changes in a group of 20 healthy
adults. To test the specificity of training-related changes in the brain, we
used a lateralized motor-sequence learning task that required participants
to master the ability to rapidly input a specific 8-digit sequence, using only
the left hand. For each participant, we acquired T1-weighted structural
MRI data, (a) before any training (baseline), (b) after short-term motor
learning and, (c) after long-term motor learning. For each participant, we
compared structural properties before and after training with those before

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
E117
PROBING BINOCULAR RIVALRY: PRE-STIMULUS ALPHA DETERMINES WHETHER SUPPRESSED-EYE PROBES ELICIT A SWITCH
IN PERCEPTUAL DOMINANCE Brian A. Metzger1,2, Kyle M. Mathewson3,
Monica Fabiani1,2, Gabriele Gratton1,2, Diane M. Beck1,2; 1University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 2Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology,
3
University of Alberta — Binocular rivalry occurs when disparate images are

E118
THE AMYGDALA SHOWS A GREATER SELECTIVITY FOR DYNAMIC
FACES THAN STATIC FACES Geena Ianni1, David Pitcher1, Leslie Ungerleider1; 1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health
— Prior fMRI studies have identified multiple face-selective regions in the
human cortex but the functional division of labor between these regions
is not yet clear. One hypothesis that has gained some empirical support is
that face-selective regions in the superior temporal sulcus (STS) preferentially respond to the dynamic aspects of faces, whereas the fusiform face
area (FFA) computes the static or invariant properties of faces (Pitcher et
al., 2011). We further tested this hypothesis by examining how face-selective regions in the occipitotemporal cortex and the amygdala respond to
dynamic and static face stimuli. Preliminary analyses from 18 healthy adult
subjects indicated that the right FFA and right occipital face area (OFA)
responded equally to dynamic and static faces. In contrast, the amygdala
showed a two-fold increase in response to dynamic faces, as compared to
static faces. A high-field strength (7 Tesla) and high resolution (1.25 mm
isotropic) scan allowed us to functionally define face-selective voxels in the
amygdala in almost all participants. This two-fold increase in response to
dynamic faces was also seen in the right posterior STS region, while the
right FFA and right OFA responded equally to dynamic and static faces.
This pattern of responses in the amygdala and right posterior STS suggests that the two regions may be preferentially involved in computing the
changeable aspects of faces, compared to the FFA and OFA.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

171

Poster Session E

E119
THE BIAS IN OUR VISION: LOWER VISUAL FIELD ADVANTAGES
FOR GRASPING REVEALED THROUGH GAZE ANALYSIS Scott
Stone1, Jason W. Flindall1, Claudia L. R. Gonzalez1; 1University of Lethbridge —
We perform numerous grasps in the upper and lower visual fields (UVF,
LVF) every day, whether to pick up an object off of a shelf at the grocery
store or to grab a glass of water from the counter. Previous studies investigating visuomotor control have demonstrated advantages when individuals are asked to point or to grasp in the LVF when compared to the UVF.
Individuals are faster and they perform fewer fixations when pointing at a
target in the LVF. With respect to grasping, more accurate grip apertures
are produced when picking up objects located in the LVF. It is likely that
visual attention plays a pivotal role in these differences between visual
fields. We used an eye-tracking environment in a search-to-reach-to-grasp
task to determine if biases are detectable through gaze analysis. Eleven
participants (eight female) grasped small cubic blocks placed in the UVF
and LVF (seven in each field) while wearing an EyeLink II eye-tracking
headset. Analysis of length and number of fixations revealed a pronounced
difference between visual fields. Grasping in the UVF required significantly
longer fixation times, and a larger number of fixations when compared to
grasping in the LVF. These results are consistent with previous behavioural
and neuroimaging studies that have shown advantages in visuomotor control in the LVF. Furthermore, the results suggest that grasping in the LVF
require less visual attention, and thus fewer cognitive resources.

E120
INCREASED SELECTIVITY IN VENTRAL VISUAL CORTEX FOLLOWING 24H SLEEP DEPRIVATION Jia Hou Poh1,3, Danyang Kong2, Michael
W.L. Chee1; 1Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, 2Stanford University, 3National University of Singapore Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering — Total sleep deprivation (TSD) for 24h can result in

selective attention deficits whereby the modulation of activation in ventral
visual cortex (VVC) is impaired (Lim et al, 2010). Beyond the reduction of
top-down selectivity, we predicted that responses of VVC neurons might
be dedifferentiated similar to cognitive aging. To test this, we reanalyzed
data from Kong et al (2012), where participants were required to attend to
faces or houses when viewing individuated face, house images or ambiguous overlapping face-house images. We analyzed trials where participants
were required to attend to single Face or House images. We identified
voxels in the VVC showing greater selectivity for houses or faces and compared the difference in response magnitude when a preferred or non-preferred stimulus was shown. Contrary to expectation, the difference metric
in TSD suggested greater selectivity relative to the rested state. We further
compared the voxels’ response during the passive viewing of composite
images, and a graded response was observed in both RW and TSD (i.e.
Face voxels: tface > tcomposite > thouse ; House voxels: thouse > tcomposite > tface ). Critically, the decrease in response from viewing preferred
to ambiguous images, was significantly greater for both house and face
voxels in TSD. In sum, contrary to expectation, de-differentiation was not
observed within the VVC. Instead, selectivity of target related activation in
voxels already showing category-specificity appears elevated in TSD.

E121
WHEN YOU SMILE, THE WORLD SMILES AT YOU: SELF-EXPRESSION EFFECTS ON FACE PROCESSING REVEALED BY VISUAL
ERPS Beatriz Calvo-Merino1,2, Alejandra Sel3, Bettina Forster1; 1City University
London, 2Complutense University of Madrid, 3Royal Holloway — Emotion simulation models suggest that the intentional pose of a facial expression can
lead to changes in one’s subjective feelings, which in turn influences the
processing of visual input. However, how visual cortical responses underlying observation of other’s facial expressions are modulated by our own
facial emotion remains unknown. This study aims to understand how one’s
facial emotion affects visual processing by measuring participants’ visual
evoked potentials (VEPs) during a facial emotion judgment task of positive
and neutral faces. We controlled for the effects of facial muscles (facial feedback) on VEPs by asking participants either to smile adopting an expression of happiness (self-happy facial expression) or to pose a neutral face
(self-neutral facial expression) in two separate blocks. Results showed that
self expression modulates face specific early visual processing components

172

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
(N170/vertex positive potential-VPP) to watching other facial expression.
Specifically, when holding a happy facial expression, neutral faces are processed similarly to happy faces. While when holding a neutral expression,
neutral and happy face activations are significantly different. This effect
was source localized within multisensory associative areas, angular gyrus
and associative visual cortex, and somatosensory cortex. Overall our data
provide novel evidence that one’s emotional expression acts as top-down
influence at early stages of visual processing modulating low-level neural
encoding of faces.

E122
LOWERING SPATIAL FREQUENCIES THROUGH EXTRA LETTER
SPACING FACILITATES WORD RECOGNITION: EVIDENCE FROM
EYE TRACKING AND ERP DATA Sebastian Korinth1, Christian Fiebach1;
1

Goethe University Frankfurt — It was recently proposed that increased letter
spacing facilitates reading in dyslexics. The mechanisms underlying this
improvement and its specificity to dyslexia, however, are unclear. Here,
we measured eye-movements (n = 24) during silent reading of multiline
newspaper texts, to explore whether extra letter spacing improves reading
speed among young normally-reading adults. Only relatively slower readers profited in the sense of showing shorter Total Reading Times whereas
faster readers were slowed down when spaces between letters were wider;
comprehension was generally unaffected. To investigate the neuronal
underpinnings of this effect, two ERP experiments (n = 20) were conducted. In experiment 1 participants performed a semantic task on words
presented either in standard spacing or with extra space between letters.
Representing a non-linguistic control condition, experiment 2 required a
perceptual decision on strings of the characters “i” and “!”, which appeared
in two length conditions of five (e.g., !ii!i) or seven characters (e.g., !!i!i!!)
and two inter-character spacing conditions (narrow vs. wide). Independent of stimulus type, wider letter spacing led to stronger amplitudes
of the N170 ERP-component. It can be excluded that this effect is merely
driven by differences in overall stimulus width, since in experiment 2 widespaced five-character items produced significantly greater N170 than narrow-spaced seven-character items, while both covered the same width on
the screen. Since an increase of inter-character space leads effectively to a
decrease of spatial frequencies, we propose that for our non-dyslexic readers the spacing-related facilitation of word recognition is caused by lower
spatial frequencies.

E123
NAVON MOVEMENTS: A NEW PARADIGM TO INVESTIGATE
LOCAL AND GLOBAL FEATURES IN BIOLOGICAL MOTION PERCEPTION. Santiago Fernandez1, Almudena Capilla2, Isabelle Duplan2, Estefania Sánchez - Pastor1, Daniella Massias3, Beatriz Calvo-Merino2,3; 1Department
of Basic Psychology II (Cognitive Processes) Complutense University of Madrid,
2
Department of Biological and Health Psychology, Universidad Autonoma de
Madrid, 3Department of Psychology, City University London — Configural and

analytical styles of processing play a role in different aspects of biological
motion (BM) perception. Different task such as action, identity, gender or
emotion recognition of point lights displays (PLD) need to access different
global or local features to be correctly performed. The inversion effect paradigm has been also used in biological motion to understand how much
of a canonical configuration is necessary to extract different BM information. However, the debate of how global/local action features interact in
BM is still open. Here we developed new BM stimuli that allow investigating attention to different action features in point light displays. Inspired
by the principle of global precedence described by Navon (Navon 1977,
Forest before trees: the precedence of global features in visual perception,
Cog Psychology, 9,353-83), we created a set of BM displays that resemble
the Navon letters: a large stimulus, in this case, a PLD, is formed by 12
small stimulus (small PLD –placed in main joints and head). We performed
two behavioral studies where we manipulated (a) congruency –big and
small PLD could depicted the same action (congruent) or different actions
(incongruent), (b) focus of attention –big/small PLD, (c) orientation (up/
inverted). Analysis of participant’s performance (accuracy, RT, d prime) on
an action recognition task and a BM visual discrimination task suggest an
interaction between congruency and focused attention, similar to the effects

2015 Annual Meeting
previous reported using the Navon letters. This provides a new biological
motion tool to further understand styles of processing action information.
(Funding-PSI2012-34558).

E124
RETINOTOPIC MAPPING OF VISUAL EVOKED POTENTIALS
Almudena Capilla1, María Melcón1, Dominique Kessel1, Rosbén Calderón1, Paula
Pazo-Álvarez2, Luis Carretié1; 1Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 2Universidad de
Santiago de Compostela — Visual stimulation is very commonly used in Cog-

nitive Neuroscience research. In this field, electroencephalography (EEG)
is one of the techniques of choice when investigating the brain correlates
of cognitive processes. However, despite its broad use, we lack information about how the morphology of the visually evoked potentials (VEPs)
varies according to the spatial location of stimulation. Hence, the aim of
this study was to perform a systematic retinotopic mapping of VEPs. EEG
activity was recorded using a cap with 59 tin electrodes (10-10 international
system). Twenty-nine voluntary participants were visually stimulated
with 60 pattern-reversal checkerboards. Checkerboards were placed in six
concentric rings of radius 1.2°, 2.6° (foveal region), 5.8°, 9.8° (perifovea),
14.9° and 22.2° (periphery). We employed independent component analysis (ICA) and beamforming to extract both the temporal dynamics and
the brain localization of the main VEP components. Our results show four
components elicited by the pattern reversal: C1 (~70 ms), P1-N1 (~105-180
ms), and P2 (~220 ms). As expected, C1 exhibited a clear polarity inversion
between upper and lower hemifields, consistent with sources in primary
visual cortex. The P1-N1 complex, of extrastriate origin, showed greater
amplitude and lower latency to stimuli located in the contralateral lower
quadrant. P2, in contrast, showed higher amplitude to stimuli presented
in the periphery of the upper visual hemifield. This study highlights the
significant retinotopic differences of key VEP components, offering a guide
of optimal spatial locations for visual stimulation to be displayed in EEG
studies. [Funded by MICINN/MINECO: PSI2011-26314, PSI2012-34558]

THINKING: Decision making
E125
FMRI INVESTIGATION OF THE ACCUMULATION OF PROBABILISTIC CATEGORICAL INFORMATION Kurt Braunlich1, Carol Seger1; 1Colorado State University — Our task required participants to categorize differ-

ent “amoeba” based upon the probabilistic evidence provided by different
“flagellum” and “nuclei” features, which were presented, one-by-one, over
four discrete steps. By precisely controlling the instrumental contingencies
between each feature and reward, and by temporally-jittering their onsets,
we were able to build and compare several computational models of processes occurring during the deliberation, commitment and feedback epochs
of each trial. Of note, our results provide evidence of two mechanisms
subserving the flexible modulation of the speed-accuracy trade-off: gain
modulation of the striatum, and gain modulation of accumulated effector-specific evidence. We also found that activity within distinct regions
of the striatum tracked the temporal evolution of different decision-related
variables. Activity within regions of the putamen reciprocally connected
with the somatomotor network tracked effector-specific evidence (e.g., evidence towards a response with the left hand), while regions of the putamen
associated with the ventral-attention network tracked the precision of the
exogenous information (i.e., the strength of evidence for either response).

E126
PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND ERROR PROCESSING ARE
ATTENTION-DEPENDENT Felix Bacigalupo1, Steven Luck1; 1University of
California - Davis — Introduction: Performance monitoring and error processing have been studied through two response-locked event-related potential
components (ERPs): an early post-response negativity (ERN) and a later
positivity (Pe). Both components have been used to study error awareness
with conflicting results. Whereas some researchers have found that error
awareness modulates Pe but not ERN, other reports have shown that ERN
is sensitive to awareness of errors, but Pe is not. Moreover, these studies
have relied on subjective reports of error awareness or stimulus perception.
However, subjective reports can be unreliable. Although it is difficult to
objectively measure awareness, it is possible to objectively measure atten-

Poster Session E
tion, which is often linked to awareness. Objective: The goal of this study
was to examine the relationship between visuo-spatial attention and performance monitoring using an objective measure of attentional selection. We
tested the hypothesis that error processing depends on attention. Methods:
We used ERPs to measure visuo-spatial attention and the relationship with
performance monitoring. Visuo-spatial attention was measured through
the N2pc component, whereas error processing was measured through the
ERN and Pe components. We used a visual crowding paradigm to study
attentional selection through a wide spatial range. Results: Target discrimination accuracy decreased whereas reaction time increased at small target-flanker distances, which is the typical behavioral pattern in crowding.
The N2pc reached maximum amplitude at intermediate distances, and
decreased dramatically at small target-flanker distances. Both ERN and Pe
decreased significantly in the most crowded conditions. Conclusion: These
results suggest that performance monitoring and error processing are both
attention-dependent.

E127
VALUE-BASED MODULATION OF EFFORT AND REWARD EXPECTATION ON THE MOTOR SYSTEM IN ABSENCE OF CHOICE Eliana
Vassena1,2, Stephanie Cobbaert1, Michael Andres1,3, Wim Fias1,2, Tom Verguts1,2;
Ghent University, 2Ghent Institute for Functional and Metabolic Imaging, 3Catholic University of Louvain — Human actions are driven by the pursuit of goals,
1

especially when achieving these goals entails a reward. Accordingly, recent
work showed that anticipating a reward in a motor task influences the
motor system, boosting motor excitability and increasing overall readiness.
Attaining a reward typically requires some mental or physical effort. Neuroimaging research showed that both reward expectation and effort requirements are encoded by the same brain regions. Moreover, reward and effort
information are combined in an integrative value signal. However, whether
mental effort is integrated with reward also at the motor level during task
preparation, remains unclear. To address these issues, we implemented a
mental effort task where reward expectation and effort requirements were
manipulated. During task preparation, TMS was delivered on the motor
cortex and motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) were recorded on the right
hand muscles to probe motor excitability. The results show that expectation of mental effort and expectation of reward are integrated in a net-value
signal (reward discounted by effort cost). More precisely, an effort-byreward interaction was obtained in which the highest motor excitability
was recorded for the highest net-value option (high reward / low effort).
Interestingly, this signal influenced the excitability of the motor system in
absence of a value-based decision or task-relevant action to be performed.
Interestingly, effort-related motor excitability was also modulated by individual differences in tendency to engage in (and enjoy) mental effort, as
measured by the Need for Cognition questionnaire, underlining a pivotal
role of subjective effort experience in value-driven preparation for action.

E128
THE INFLUENCE OF AROUSAL ON RISKY DECISION-MAKING
Joseph Moran1,2,3, Tad Brunye2,3, Amanda Holmes2, Julie Cantelon2, Bernd
Figner4, Leah Somerville1, Holly Taylor2; 1Harvard University, 2Tufts University,
3
US Army Natick, Soldier, Research, Development, and Engineering Center, 4Radboud University — Human decision-making under uncertainty involves a

calculus of risk and return. Both individual and situational influences on
risky decisions exert powerful effects on our behavior. Research using the
Columbia Card Task (CCT; Figner et al., 2009), a dynamic risky choice task
in which trial-by-trial odds information changes as a function of variable
win amounts, loss amounts, and odds of losing, reveals that people high
in need for arousal take more risks, but only in the immediate-feedback,
‘hot’ affective processing version of the task, relative to the no-feedback,
deliberative, ‘cold’ version of the task. We investigated whether experimentally-inducing high and low arousal states would increase or decrease
risk-taking differentially in Hot and Cold decision contexts. In Experiment
1, participants (N=32) underwent mood induction through music (Arousal
X Valence: Positive/Negative), and then completed counterbalanced Hot
and Cold CCTs. Inducing high versus low arousal increased risk-taking
overall, increased risk-taking under low gain, and interacted with feedback such that in the Hot CCT participants under high arousal took more
risks even when they could gain only a low amount. There was no effect of
induced mood valence on risk-taking behavior. Experiment 2 (N=48) com-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

173

Poster Session E
pared a no-arousal control and high arousal conditions, and revealed no
differences in risk-taking behavior, suggesting that in Experiment 1, differences in risk-taking between high and low arousal may have arisen from
low, rather than high, arousal states. Taken together, these results argue
that feedback-mediated arousal instituted in the hot CCT may be moderated by pre-task induction of low-arousal.

E129
SUB-SECOND DOPAMINE FLUCTUATIONS IN HUMAN STRIATUM
ENCODE SUPERPOSED ERROR SIGNALS ABOUT ACTUAL AND
COUNTERFACTUAL REWARD. Kenneth T. Kishida1, Ignacio Saez1,2, Terry
Lohrenz1, Mark P. Witcher3, Adrian W. Laxton3, Stephen B. Tatter3, Jason P. White1,
Thomas L. Ellis3, Paul E. M. Phillips4, P. Read Montague1,5,6; 1Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, 2University of California, Berkeley, 3Wake Forest University
Health Sciences, 4University of Washington, Seattle, 5Virginia Tech, 6University
College London — In the mammalian brain, dopamine is a critical neuromodulator whose actions underlie learning, decision-making, and behavioral
control. Degeneration of dopamine neurons causes Parkinson’s disease
while dysregulation of dopamine signaling is believed to contribute to
psychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia, addiction, and depression.
Experiments in animal models support the idea that dopamine release
in the striatum encodes reward prediction errors (RPEs: the difference
between actual and expected outcomes) during ongoing decision-making.
To date, there have been no measurements of dopamine release with the
requisite temporal resolution or cognitive challenges required to test this
hypothesis directly in the human brain. We monitored sub-second dopamine fluctuations in the striatum of humans with Parkinson’s disease and
found that dopamine transients did not simply encode RPEs, but were
consistent with a signal that superposes these errors with counterfactual
prediction errors (CPEs). CPEs act to adjust valuation estimates: gains that
‘might have been better’ are reduced in value and losses that ‘might have
been worse’ are increased in value. Notably, this compositional encoding
of error terms – via sub-second dopamine fluctuations – corresponds with
how subjects should feel about an outcome and thus may be one way the
brain couples computations over outcomes to feelings about experience in
the context of alternative possibilities. Using a novel adaptation of fast-scan
cyclic voltammetry we demonstrate that dopamine transients are detectable
in humans with Parkinson’s disease. We show that longstanding hypotheses generated and supported by work in animal models are incomplete for
explaining the neurobiology underlying human cognition.

E130
SPONTANEOUS EYEBLINK RATE MODIFIES THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN DEPRESSION AND DECISION-MAKING Kaileigh Byrne1,
Dominique Norris1, Darrell Worthy1; 1Texas A&M University — Depressive

symptomatology has been associated with alterations in decision-making, although the conclusions have been mixed with depressed individuals showing impairments in some contexts, but advantages in others. The
dopaminergic system may link depressive symptoms with decision-making performance. In the present study, we assess the role of spontaneous
eyeblink rate, a marker of central dopaminergic activity, in moderating the
relationship between depressive symptoms and decision-making performance. A non-clinical sample of college-aged students (N=48) completed
the spontaneous eyeblink rate recording, the Center for Epidemiological
Studies Depression (CES-D) Scale, and the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) to
assess decision-making ability. Regression results revealed that eyeblink
rate moderated the relationship between depressive symptoms and advantageous decisions on the IGT in which individuals with more depressive
symptomatology and a faster EBR performed better on the task. Further
regression analyses of IGT performance for each deck showed that EBR
specifically modified selection of Deck D, the advantageous high magnitude, low frequency loss deck, among individuals with more depressive
symptomatology. Computational modeling results showed that the Value
Plus-Perseveration (VPP) model best fit the data. Correlational analyses between VPP model parameters and EBR and depressive symptoms
demonstrated that depressive symptoms alone were associated with
enhanced loss aversion behavior, while individuals with a faster EBR and
more depressive symptoms exhibited an increased tendency to persevere

174

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
in selecting options with net gains. These findings suggest that depressed
individuals have altered dopamine availability, which may contribute to
differences in decision-making behavior.

E131
DISSOCIATION OF LOSS AVERSION AND DELAY DISCOUNTING
IN TWO VARIANTS OF FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA Winston
Chiong1, Kristie Wood1, Alex J Beagle1, Ming Hsu2, Andrew S Kayser1, Bruce
L Miller1, Joel H Kramer; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University of
California, Berkeley — Frontotemporal dementia comprises three clinical

variants with linked etiologies that cause progressive degeneration of the
frontal and temporal lobes. A behavioral/frontal variant is associated with
dramatic changes in personality and behavior. Meanwhile, a semantic/
temporal variant, often classified as a language disorder, is also known
to cause profound personality changes. Behavioral differences between
these variants have not been formally characterized. We presented healthy
older control subjects and patients with the behavioral/frontal variant, the
semantic/temporal variant, or Alzheimer’s disease with two decision-making tasks. In a loss aversion task, participants were endowed with $30 and
decided whether to accept 36 gambles offering equal chances of winning
or losing more real money, with win:loss amount ratios ranging from 0.62.2. In a delay discounting task, participants made 128 hypothetical choices
between smaller immediate rewards ($3-90) and larger rewards ($5-100)
delayed between 1 week and 6 months. Both tasks included control conditions to exclude patients who could not understand the task. In a general
linear model controlling for age, gender, education and MMSE, patients
with the behavioral/frontal variant were less loss averse (λ=1.05, p=0.037)
than controls (λ=1.49), while patients with the semantic/temporal variant
were more loss averse (λ=1.69, p=0.044) than controls. In a second general
linear model with the same covariates, patients with the semantic/temporal variant (74.6%, p=0.020), but not patients with the behavioral/frontal
variant (53.1%, p=0.107), were more likely to choose smaller immediate
rewards than controls (47.3%). Our findings suggest dissociable contributions of frontal and anterior temporal networks to impaired decision-making in neurological disease.

E132
ACUTE STRESS AND AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL
REWARD PROCESSING Stephanie Potts1, Travis McCuddy1, Anthony J.
Porcelli1; 1Marquette University — Recent research indicates brain regions
involved in processing reward-related information exhibit marked functional changes under acute stress, no longer differentiating between positive and negative monetary outcomes (Porcelli et al., 2012). Further evidence suggests that reward processing capabilities change as a function
of age, particularly for negative outcomes (Samanez-Larkin et al., 2007).
However, interactions between acute stress and age have not been examined together in this context. This study examined neural reward processing under acute stress between young (18-30; current n = 16) and older
adults (over 60; current n = 13). Participants were either exposed to acute
stress (social evaluative cold pressor; Schwabe et al., 2008) or a no-stress
control before engaging in a novel variant of a well-documented “card
guessing task” involving actual monetary rewards and punishments (e.g.,
Delgado et al., 2000) during fMRI scanning. Choice and fMRI data, psychophysiological measures (blood pressure, skin conductance, and EKG), and
salivary cortisol were collected. Preliminary analysis indicates that only
stressed participants exhibited elevated psychophysiological measures of
sympathetic nervous system reactivity. Salivary cortisol data are currently
being assayed; it is expected that only participants exposed to acute stress
will demonstrate a significant increase. Consistent with the literature, preliminary fMRI analysis confirms significantly higher striatal responses to
monetary gains over losses; more power is needed to examine the role of
acute stress. It is expected that in stressed participants striatal and orbitofrontal regions will no longer differentiate between monetary outcomes,
and that this pattern will be enhanced in older adults.

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session E

E133
COMPUTATION AND UPDATE OF NEURAL VALUE SIGNALS
ARE BIASED BY ATTENTION IN A MULTIDIMENSIONAL DECISION-MAKING TASK Yuan Chang Leong1,2, Reka Daniel2, Angela Radulescu2, Yael Niv2; 1Stanford University, 2Princeton University — Activity in the

ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and the posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) has been shown to track measures of subjective value in simple
choice tasks. We explored how these neural representations of value are
constructed and updated in multidimensional environments. 25 participants performed a decision-making task with multidimensional stimuli
and probabilistic rewards. In this task, only one stimulus dimension was
relevant for predicting reward. Participants were not told in advance which
was the reward-relevant dimension, and had to figure it out via trial-and-error learning. Using eye tracking and multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI
data, we measured participants’ attention as they performed the task. Participants’ trial-by-trial behavior was best explained by a computational
model where attention biased how value was computed and updated.
Accordingly, we found that value-related activity in the VMPFC and PCC
reflected both attentional biases. We further found that participants’ focus
of attention was dynamically modulated by learned values, and activity
in a frontoparietal network, including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(dlPFC) and intraparietal sulcus (IPS), was higher when attention switched
across dimensions. Taken together, our results suggest that trial-and-error
value learning is biased by attention, and that this bias is reflected in signals
in medial brain areas (VMPFC and PCC) and might be implemented in
lateral control (DLPFC, IPS) regions.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

175

Poster Session F
ATTENTION: Other
F1
IMPAIRED ATTENTIONAL CONTROL DURING WORKING MEMORY
IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE David Everling1, Clara Warden1, Sophie YorkWilliams2, Kathleen Poston1; 1Stanford University, 2University of Colorado Boulder — Working Memory (WM) deficit and Attention Control (AC) impair-

ment are common symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD). Our previous
research revealed WM deficits in PD during a modified-Sternberg task
(Poston,2013). These deficits could arise from impairment in AC, which is
difficult to disentangle from WM. Striving for this distinction, we employed
two WM tasks, each with and without visual distractor conditions. In Task
1 participants memorized five numbers, shown either with alphabetic distractors (High-AC) or without alphabetic distractors (Low-AC). In Task
2 participants memorized ‘landscapes’ with (High-AC) or without (LowAC) overlaid ‘face’ distractors (Gazzaley,2012). Thereby, WM-load was
consistent across trials while AC-load varied. That is, High-AC conditions
involved equivalent memorization of relevant stimuli as Low-AC conditions, but additionally required increased AC to suppress irrelevant stimuli. We tested 18 PD and 10 age- and education-matched Controls (HC).
PD were tested both ON and OFF dopaminergic medications. Task 1
results: PD-OFF (p=0.01), but not HC (p=0.8), had decreased WM accuracy
in High-AC compared to Low-AC. AC-related accuracy (High-AC) was
improved slightly with dopamine (PD-ON,p=0.08). No reaction time (RT)
differences were observed between High-AC and Low-AC in any group.
Task 2 results: Both HC (p=0.04) and PD-OFF (p=0.001) had decreased
WM accuracy in High-AC compared to Low-AC. AC-related accuracy
(High-AC) did not improve with dopamine (PD-ON,p=0.001). PD were
slower with distractors present, regardless of medication state (PD-OFF
p=0.003;PD-ON p=0.01;HC p=0.8). Our findings help to isolate the influence of AC during WM in PD, and further, indicate that dopamine-replacement may be inconsequential to observed deficits.

F2
THE BENEFITS OF VISUO-ATTENTIVE TRAINING ON A MULTIPLE
OBJECT TRACKING (MOT) TASK TRANSFER TO ATTENTIONAL,
BUT NOT VISUO-PERCEPTUAL TASK PERFORMANCE: THE ROLE
FOR FEEDBACK. Chiara Perico1,2, Jocelyn Faubert3, Armando Bertone1,2;
1
Perceptual Neuroscience Lab (PNLab) for Autism and Development, McGill University, 2School/Applied Child Psychology, Dept of Educational and Counseling
Psychology, McGill University, 3Visual Psychophysics and Perception Laboratory,
School of Optometry, Université de Montréal — Introduction. Attention plays

an integral role in learning, affecting performance on most cognitive tasks.
Although tools exist to assess and improve attention, few studies determine
the transferability of attentional capacities acquired during training to other
cognitive domains. Although feedback plays a critical role during learning, its effects with regards to transfer are not often empirically assessed.
Goals. To assess whether attentional capacities acquired during training on
a Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) task are transferrable to other measures
of attention and perception. The role of feedback was investigated to determine its effect on performance, and subsequent transferability. Methods.
Thirty typically developing adults participated in 4 testing sessions. On day
1, intellectual, attentional (CPT-II) and perceptual (sensitivity to motion
and form) baseline abilities were assessed along with a baseline MOT performance without feedback. On day 2 and 3, participants were placed into 2
groups; only one group received feedback during MOT training. On day 4,
participants were re-assessed on the same attentional and perceptual measures, along with MOT performance. Results. MOT performance at day 4
was higher for the feedback group, defined by increased speed threshold
for tracking 4 of 8 items. In addition, improved MOT performance was
found to transfer within-domain to other attention tasks (MOT to CPT-II),
specifically for the feedback group, but not across domain [i.e., from MOT

176

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

to form / motion sensitivity] whether or not feedback was available during
training. Conclusion Results demonstrate that feedback is important during
learning, and that it may affect transferability of cognitive abilities.

F3
NEURAL CASCADE OF CONFLICT PROCESSING: NOT JUST TIMEON-TASK! Cameron C. McKay1, Berry van den Berg1,2, Marty G. Woldorff1;
1

Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, 2BCN Neuroimaging Center,
University of Groningen, Groningen — In a visual conflict task, such as the

Stroop or Eriksen flanker task, participants generally have longer response
times (RTs) on trials involving conflict (incongruent trials) compared to
congruent trials. Two event-related-potential (ERP) components classically
associated with the processing of stimulus conflict are the Ninc (incongruency-related negativity) and LPC (late-positive complex), which are derived
from the ERP difference wave of incongruent minus congruent trials. It has
been questioned, however, whether the Ninc and LPC, or for that matter
other neural measures from conflict tasks (e.g., fMRI), reflect true conflict
processing, or whether such effects derive mainly from differential time on
task, as it is difficult to distinguish these factors in a conflict task. Here, we
leveraged high-temporal-resolution ERP measures of brain activity while
participants performed two behavioral tasks, administered in randomized
order. The first task, a modified Erikson flanker paradigm (with congruent
and incongruent trials), was used to evoke the classic RT and ERP effects
associated with conflict. In the second task, a non-conflict comparison condition, participants visually discriminated the sizes of two gaps in a circle
(either easy or hard discrimination). Behaviorally, we titrated the parameters to yield virtually identical effects of conflict and difficulty on the RTs
(27 ms). Neurally, we found a brief Ninc-like component in the hard-easy
trial ERP difference wave, with the corresponding incongruent-congruent
Ninc effect featuring a much longer-duration, two-peak structure. These
results provide clear evidence that the Ninc incongruency effect does not
just reflect time on task, but includes a true conflict-processing component.

F4
ATTENTIONAL MODULATION IN THE CEREBELLUM REVEALED BY
A MULTIPLE OBJECT TRACKING TASK AND CEREBRO-CEREBELLAR FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY E.J. Levin1, J.A. Brissenden1, K.J. Devaney1, M.L. Rosen1, D.E. Osher1, M.A. Halko2, D.C. Somers1; 1Boston University,
2
Harvard Medical School and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center — Increasing

evidence from behavioral and neuroimaging studies supports the involvement of the cerebellum in higher-order cognitive processes. Cerebellar
lesions have been associated with attentional deficits (Schweizer et al.,
2007), and intrinsic functional connectivity has been established between
human cortical networks and specific nodes of the cerebellum (Buckner et
al., 2011). Here, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
investigate cerebellar correlates of attention using a multiple-object tracking task. Additionally, we employed resting-state functional connectivity
using cortical seeds (Yeo et al., 2011) to localize cerebellar nodes of cortical
networks in individual subjects. Our results indicate a robust attentional
effect within cerebellar regions functionally connected to the cortical dorsal
attention network. Conversely, cerebellar regions functionally connected to
the cortical default mode network show a reliable pattern of deactivation
across subjects. These results parallel the patterns simultaneously observed
in cortical networks. There is a strong relationship between blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal and the strength of connectivity to the
cortical dorsal attention network within individual cerebellar voxels. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that regions of the cerebellum co-activate
with the cortical dorsal attention network, and suggest that the functional
topography of the cerebellum can be accurately characterized by individual connectivity. This work was supported by the National Institutes for
Health (NIH R01EY022229).

2015 Annual Meeting

F5
CEREBRO-CEREBELLAR FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY PREDICTS
CEREBELLAR ACTIVATION DURING VISUAL WORKING MEMORY
TASK PERFORMANCE J.A. Brissenden1, E.J. Levin1, D.E. Osher1, K.J. Devaney1, M.A. Halko2, D.C. Somers1; 1Boston University, 2Harvard Medical School
and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center — The study of cerebellum function

has traditionally been limited to the motor domain. Recent research has
begun to characterize the cerebellum’s role in cognition (see Schmahmann,
2010) and has demonstrated intrinsic functional connectivity between cerebral cortical networks and distinct cerebellar regions (Buckner et al., 2011).
Here, we investigate cerebellar contributions to visual working memory
(VWM). During functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), subjects
performed a change detection task in which memory load was parametrically varied. Additionally, we employed resting-state functional connectivity analysis using cortical network seeds (Yeo et al., 2011) to parcellate
cerebro-cerebellar networks in individual subjects. A region-of-interest
analysis revealed (1) strong load-dependent activation in cerebellar regions
functionally connected to the dorsal attention network, and (2) consistent
deactivation within cerebellar regions functionally connected to the default
mode network. These results mirror the activation patterns observed in
cerebral cortical networks. Across the cerebellum, the strength of intrinsic functional connectivity with either the dorsal attention network or the
default mode network significantly predicted the response of individual
cerebellar voxels. Lastly, we observed a clear left hemisphere bias in cerebellar responses during VWM, consistent with a well-documented right-hemisphere VWM bias seen within the cerebral dorsal attention network. Taken
together, our results indicate that cerebellar nodes of the dorsal attention
network meaningfully contribute to overall network function. This work
was supported by the National Institutes for Health (NIH RO1EY022229)
and the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program (DGE-1247312).

F6
THE ROLE OF TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL PREDICTABILITY FOR
EARLY-ATTENTIONAL ADJUSTMENTS AFTER COGNITIVE CONFLICT Klaas Bombeke1, Wout Duthoo1, Hanne Schevernels1, Wim Notebaert1,
C. Nico Boehler1; 1Ghent university — Cognitive control refers to our ability to

adjust information processing in order to optimize future action outcomes.
An often-studied phenomenon is the congruency sequence effect - the finding that congruency effects in conflict tasks are smaller after incongruent
trials. This effect is commonly explained by a transient, conflict-induced
increase in selective attention, wherein the amount of conflict on the next
trial is reduced by enhancing task-relevant information, inhibiting task-irrelevant information, or both. While fMRI data exists to support this claim,
information about the temporal dynamics of such effects is very limited,
in part because it is difficult to distinguish responses to the simultaneously presented relevant and the irrelevant stimulus dimension with EEG.
Here, we addressed this problem by systematically varying the temporal
onset of the relevant and the irrelevant stimulus dimension. Moreover,
we manipulated whether irrelevant information was temporally predictable or not and included both Stroop and Flanker tasks to compare feature
and spatial attention, respectively. Results show that when task-irrelevant
stimulus information was consistently presented 200 milliseconds before
the relevant stimulus information, we found a significant posterior difference around 140 milliseconds (visual N1) depending on the previous trial’s
congruency. This effect only appeared in the flanker task, indicating a role
for spatial attention. Taken together, these results suggest that attentional
adjustments only occurred when irrelevant, potentially conflicting information was both temporally and spatially predictable. As such, our study
identified an attentional control mechanism that seems to lie at the crossroads between reactive, conflict-induced and proactive, strategic control
adjustments.

F7
ATTENTION AND MEMORY FUNCTIONING IN SCHOOL-AGED
CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS WITH BRAIN AND CNS TUMORS
AFTER PROTON RADIATION THERAPY Casey L. Evans1, Julie A. Grieco1,
Brendan H. Pulsifer1, Torunn I. Yock1; 1Massachusetts General Hospital — Pur-

Poster Session F
pose: Radiation is integral in treatment of brain and central nervous
system (CNS) tumors. However, conventional photon radiation is associated with negative cognitive sequelae. Proton radiotherapy (PRT), which
enables better targeting of tumors, might entail fewer sequelae. This study
examined neurocognitive functioning after PRT, specifically attention and
memory due to their relevance for academic success. Method: 65 patients,
ages 5–21 (Mean=11.2;SD=4.3) were evaluated at PRT initiation and ≥1
year after (Mean=2.5 years;SD=2.0). Intelligence, sustained attention, and
memory were assessed with age-appropriate standardized measures.
Results: Subjects were 46% medulloblastoma, 17% craniopharyngioma,
9% ependymoma, 28% other; 51% received whole brain radiation; 61%
chemotherapy; 82% had resection; 53% were infratentorial. Baseline and
follow-up mean scores were all within the average range. IQ, working
memory, sustained attention, and verbal and visual memory for the total
sample were unchanged at follow-up (ns). Age at baseline, histology, chemotherapy, resection, and location were unrelated to cognitive outcomes.
Mean scaled scores for females were lower than males in verbal immediate
(p=0.03) and delayed memory (p=0.01) at follow-up. Conclusion: Nearly
2½ years after PRT, attention, memory and intelligence were largely stable.
Younger patients did not fare worse, a favorable outcome to photon radiation. Females did not make steady gains in verbal memory, although no
decline was observed. PRT shows promise as a treatment for CNS tumors,
avoiding many negative neurocognitive sequelae and increasing the potential for academic success.

F8
THE PHYSICAL SALIENCE AND REWARD VALUE OF A TARGET
IMPROVE VISUAL SEARCH THROUGH DIFFERENT MECHANISMS
Lingling Wang1, Marissa L. Gamble1, Molly M. Pearlstein1, Sam N. Brudner1,
Marty G. Woldorff1; 1Duke University — In visual search tasks, targets asso-

ciated with reward have been found to improve performance. One possible explanation is that increased target value facilitates attentional capture and orienting similarly to increasing physical salience. We tested this
hypothesis by manipulating target salience and value in a visual search
task, while recording behavior measures and ERPs, with a focus on the
attentional-orienting-sensitive N2pc component. In three experimental
phases, participants searched visual arrays for color-singleton targets of
either a high-salience color or one of two low-salience colors. In the baseline phase, which offered no rewards, the response times (RTs) and N2pc
latencies were shorter for high- than low-salience targets, indicating faster
attentional selection and orienting. In the equal-reward phase, participants
received monetary rewards for fast and correct responses at the same lowlevel reward rate for all target types. This reward context improved the
overall search performance, similarly shortening RTs for both high- and
low-salience targets, whereas no change was observed on the N2pc latencies. In the selective-reward phase, the reward rate was made selectively
higher for one of the two low-salience colors, which resulted in the RTs
to these low-physical-salience targets becoming as fast as the high-physical-salience targets. In spite of the equally fast behavioral performance,
the N2pc for low-salience, high-reward targets was still later than that for
high-salience targets, although it was significantly larger. These findings
suggest that target reward associations can rapidly modulate visual selection, but the underlying mechanisms are different than those related to true
physical salience.

F9
THE ROLE OF CONTEXT IN GAZE-TRIGGERED ORIENTING TO
HAPPY AND DISGUSTED GAZING FACES Rachel Layton1, John Treffalls1, Natalie Ceballos1, Reiko Graham1; 1Department of Psychology, Texas State
University — Evidence regarding the moderating role of facial expression

on gaze-triggered orienting has been mixed, suggesting that experimental
context and task demands are important factors in these effects. This study
examined how experimental context influences gaze and expression interactions in an attentional orienting task with expressive gazing cues (disgusted and happy faces) and targets depicting prosocial or antisocial acts.
Seventy-three participants (Mage = 19.0 years) completed a Posner-style
cuing task wherein expressive faces (disgusted vs. smiling) either validly
or invalidly cued the location of targets. Repeated measures ANOVA of
mean reaction times to identify targets revealed that participants were
faster to identify prosocial vs. antisocial targets, and faster to detect targets

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

177

Poster Session F
cued by happy faces. These main effects of cue expression and target type
were mitigated by an interaction, driven by the fact that participants were
faster to identify antisocial acts cued by disgusted faces. There was also a
cue expression by validity interaction: the cuing effect (faster RTs to validly-cued trials) was only present for disgusted faces, and not for happy
faces. These results suggest that participants were forming cue/target contingencies based on the context created by pairing emotional faces with
motivationally relevant cues. Thus, expectancies created by experimental
context are an important determinant of gaze and expression interactions
and gaze-triggered orienting.

F10
VISUAL ATTENTION TO A VIDEO-CLASS INCREASES FOLLOWING
AUDITORY DISTRACTORS WHEN STUDENTS ENJOY THE CLASS:
AN EYE-TRACKING STUDY Luana Righi1, Hamilton Haddad1, Gilberto Fernando Xavier1; 1University of São Paulo — Aim: This study investigated the

effect of auditory distractors on orientation of visual attention during a
video-class on physiology and its interaction with participant’s enjoyment.
Methods: Twelve participants watched a video-class on physiology during
which 6 auditory distractors lasting about 710 ms each were individually
and unpredictably presented. The participants were strongly encouraged to attend to the video-class and were informed that there would be
an exam after the video. At the end of the presentation, the participants
rated how much they enjoyed the video-class using a visual scale. Based
on this scale, the participants were divided into two groups: low rates
group (rate=6.9±1.15 mean±s.d; n=6) and high rates group (rate=9.15±0.62
mean±sd; n=6). Eye movements were recorded during the video-class.
Average fixation durations (FD) along areas of interest (AOIs), defined as
the entire area of the video-class projection, lasting 1000 ms each before and
after distractors presentations was evaluated. Results: Groups’ FD in AOI
before distractor presentation did not differ among each other (P=0.80). In
contrast, FD after distractor presentation was longer for high rate group as
compared to low rate group (P=0.03). Finally, only high rate group exhibited an increase in FD after distractor presentation as compared to before
(P=0.01). Conclusion: Unpredictable auditory distractors presentations
lead to an increase in the fixation duration shortly after their presentation
when participants enjoyed the video-class. It suggests the occurrence of an
increased orientation of attention towards information considered relevant
when internal motivation is high.

F11
TRACKING THE LOCUS OF LEARNED SELECTIVE ATTENTION
DURING RULE LEARNING WITH MULTI-VOXEL PATTERN ANALYSIS Dmitrii Paniukov1, Tyler Davis1; 1Texas Tech University — Attention plays

a critical role in category learning by enhancing processing of stimulus
features that are diagnostic of category membership. Recently, multivoxel
pattern analysis (MVPA) methods have been used to decode the locus of
attention in basic cuing paradigms and naturalistic target detection tasks
(e.g., movies). In the present study, we examined whether MVPA could
be used to measure the changes in selective attention that are theorized to
occur during rule-based category learning. To study the temporal dynamics of learned selective attention, we utilized two independent rule-based
category learning tasks. In the matching task, participants learned a rule
via trial-and-error by selecting one of four target stimuli that matched a
reference stimulus on a single feature. In the categorization task, participants learned a rule via trial-and-error by categorizing one stimulus at a
time into one of two categories. In both tasks, when the rule was learned, it
was switched to another rule. Using fMRI data from the matching task as
a training set, we found significant increases in MVPA classifier output for
diagnostic features as subjects solved rules in the categorization task. These
results suggest that MVPA may be useful for testing theories of learned
selective attention in category learning.

F12
LEVERAGING OBJECT SELECTIVITY TO MODEL THE ROLE OF
LEARNED SELECTIVE ATTENTION IN BASE-RATE NEGLECT Sean
O’Bryan1, Tyler Davis1; 1Texas Tech University — Selective attention is a critical
component of learning that allows people to distinguish between useful
and irrelevant information. In this experiment, we investigated the neural
basis of selective attention in cue learning and how it contributes to base-

178

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
rate neglect. Subjects learned to predict four hypothetical diseases based
on a combination of face, object, and scene cues. Objects and scenes were
diagnostic cues, and predicted either a common or rare disease. Prior to
the task, we collected independent localizer scans that were used to train a
classifier to distinguish between activation patterns for the different object
classes. This classifier was then used to predict attention to cues during
learning and test. During learning, classifier output was significantly
higher for diagnostic cues than non-predictive cues. During test, ambiguous trials were presented in which a cue for the rare disease was paired
with a cue for the common disease. Consistent with previous behavioral
results, participants ignored the disease base rates and selected the rare disease more often. Accordingly, classifier output was significantly higher for
the rare cue than common cue. These results support attentional models of
base-rate neglect and suggest that multi-voxel analyses can be used to test
theories of learned selective attention.

F13
SEMANTIC CATEGORIZATION IN INHIBITORY PROCESSING FOR
MEDICATION-NAIVE ATTENTION-DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER ADOLESCENTS Demi Krieger1, Neena K. Rao1, Bambi Delarosa1,
Michael A. Kraut3, John Hart, Jr.1,2; 1University of Texas at Dallas, Center for Brain
Health School of Behavioral Brain Sciences, 2University of Texas at Southwestern
Medical Center, Department of Neurology, 3Johns Hopkins University, Department of Radiology — The primary goal of this study was to investigate how
semantic complexity influences inhibition in children with ADHD. While
EEG was recorded, six male medicine-naive adolescents diagnosed with
ADHD and six male neurotypical adolescents completed three versions of
a response inhibition task in which the complexity of semantic processing
was manipulated. The lowest level of semantic processing required only
simple feature-based discrimination (i.e, respond to a picture of a single
car [80% Go] but not a single dog [20% No-Go]; the next level required
more complex feature-based discrimination (i.e, respond to multiple types
of cars but not multiple types of dogs); and the highest level required
conceptual-based discrimination (i.e, respond to objects but not animals).
The difference in mean evoked potential amplitudes for No-Go compared
to Go responses at 300 ms (P3) in frontal regions (Fz) decreased as each
task increased in semantic complexity for ADHD adolescents. The control
group only showed a difference in mean evoked potential amplitudes at
300 ms in frontal electrodes for the most semantically complex condition.
The pattern of frontal-mediated inhibition effects for the ADHD group
compared to the control group suggests that successful inhibition for adolescents with ADHD requires greater involvement of frontal-mediated
semantic resources.

F14
NOT ALL MIND WANDERING IS CREATED EQUAL Paul Seli1, Tanya
Jonker1, Daniel Smilek1, Jonathan Smallwood2; 1University of Waterloo, 2University of York — The available evidence suggests that mind wandering can

occur either spontaneously (unintentionally) or deliberately (unintentionally). In the present study, we related individual differences in spontaneous
and deliberate mind wandering to resting-state functional connectivity
maps, using the default mode network (DMN) hubs as seed regions (PCC,
mPFC, and hippocampal formation). Critically, although the DMN is commonly believed to reflect increases in mind wandering, we found stronger
functional connectivity between the DMN and the hippocampal formation
for individuals who self-reported less spontaneous mind wandering. These
results suggest that the relationship between the functional activity of the
DMN and experiences such as mind-wandering is more complex than typically assumed, and demonstrate the value of understanding the heterogeneous nature of self-generated experiences as a lens through which to
understand intrinsic neural processes.

2015 Annual Meeting

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
F15
AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY ON THE INFLUENCE OF
EMOTION ON INTERFERENCE CONTROL IN CHILDREN Aishah Abdul
Rahman1, Sarah Elke1, Sandra Wiebe1; 1University of Alberta — Early childhood

is marked by rapid development in children’s cognitive and emotion regulation abilities. In this study, we examined how emotion influenced children’s ability to resist distractor interference at the behavioural and neural
levels. Two groups of children, in early childhood (n = 19; mean age = 5;1)
and middle childhood (n = 18; mean age = 7;5), completed a face flanker
paradigm while scalp EEG was recorded. Children were asked to press a
button indicating the colour of the border around the central target face,
ignoring the flanking distractor faces bordered by the same (congruent) or
different (incongruent) colour. The target face was happy, angry, or neutral. Dependent measures included accuracy, speed, and event-related
potential (ERP) measures (N2 amplitude and latency). Children responded
slower on incongruent trials. Trials with happy and angry targets had
differing effects on children’s performance: happy targets facilitated task
accuracy, whereas angry targets slowed responding. The effect of emotion
on resisting distractor interference varied with age: in older children only,
N2 latency was earlier for angry targets than happy targets. Our findings,
in keeping with the dual competition framework (Pessoa, 2009), highlight
that cognitive performance may be enhanced or impaired by emotion. The
contrasting manner in which happy (low level of threat) and angry (high
level of threat) targets influenced children’s performance suggests that the
level of threat in the emotional information is crucial in determining its
effect on cognitive performance.

F16
DIFFERENTIAL AMYGDALA SUB-NUCLEI FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY SUPPORTS AFFECTIVE PROCESSING IN BIPOLAR
AND UNIPOLAR MOOD DISORDERS Vincent Man1, June Gruber2, David
C. Glahn3, William A. Cunningham1; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Colorado Boulder, 3Yale University — There has been increased recent attention to

understanding the unique functions of the sub-nuclei within the amygdaloid complex (Roy et al., 2010), which can be distinguished in cytoarchitecture and connectivity (Sah et al., 2003), and their role in affective processing.
In light of these insights, we examined functional connectivity (FC) across
sub-regions of the amygdala in bipolar disorder (BD). BD is characterized
by fluctuations between manic, depressive, and euthymic mood states,
and we propose that FC disruptions between the amygdala and prefrontal
cortex regions (Anticevic et al., 2013) may distinguish bipolar disorder from
other affective disorders. We explored differential FC patterns to valenced
stimuli among currently manic bipolar (BD-manic; n=9), depressed bipolar (BD-depressed; n=11), and depressed unipolar (MDD-depressed; n=15)
adults. All participants viewed blocks of positive, negative, and neutral
images (IAPS; Lang et al., 2008) during fMRI. We found that FC between
the whole amygdala and a supragenual cingulate cluster when processing
affective information can differentiate between current mood state across
disorders. The BD-depressed group showed stronger negative connectivity
for negative, compared to positive or neutral, stimuli. The BD-manic group
exhibited the reverse effect. Further, decreased FC was found for MDD-depressed participants regardless of stimuli valence. Exploring the sub-nuclei
separately demonstrated that whole-amygdala results are predominantly
explained by the laterobasal nuclei. These findings are consistent with the
idea that the supragenual cingulate may play a regulatory role in its interaction with the specific regions of the amygdala, and a reduced regulatory
process may account for current symptoms in affective disorders.

F17
EEG CORRELATES OF ENGAGEMENT IN AN ASSESSMENT CONTEXT Laura Halderman1, Bridgid Finn1, Nicole Long2, Isaac Pedisich2, Patrick
Crutchley2, Michael Kahana2; 1Educational Testing Service, 2University of Pennsylvania — Low engagement is problematic when tests are low-stakes for

students but have significant consequences for teachers or schools. Low

Poster Session F
engagement results in scores that underestimate actual abilities which
jeopardizes test validity and leaves institutions drawing questionable
conclusions about the efficacy of their programs. Online measurement of
engagement using EEG provides an objective view into the test-taker’s
experience and potentially yields stronger evidence of engagement than
self-report measures. The current study sought to establish EEG correlates
of engagement to be used in future studies to investigate improvements
in assessment designs that foster engagement during the test. Forty university students participated in a simulated GRE session while EEG was
recorded from 128 channels. Participants completed two verbal and two
quantitative GRE test blocks for a total of 40 items each and after half of the
items rated their engagement on a scale of 1-6. Power in 7 frequency bands
(delta, theta, alpha, beta, low, medium and high gamma) was computed for
6 ROIs on the scalp (left/right frontal, left/right temporal and left/right
parietal). Correlations between engagement ratings and power in each frequency band revealed positive correlations for gamma in right frontal, left
temporal and left/right parietal ROIs and beta in left temporal and right
parietal ROIs. Negative correlations were found for alpha and beta in left
frontal and right temporal ROIs. An ANOVA contrasting high (ratings of
4-6) and low (1-3) engagement confirmed these results. Additional analyses
will investigate how item type (verbal vs. quantitative) and session length
modulate levels of engagement.

F18
DECREASES IN CORTISOL ARE POSITIVELY ASSOCIATED WITH
IMPROVEMENTS IN EXECUTIVE CONTROL Arryn Robbins1, Laura
Thompson1; 1New Mexico State University — Research in stress reactivity in the

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA Axis) has uncovered influences
on memory systems (e.g. de Quervain, Roozendaal, & McGaugh, 2013;
Wolf, 2003), but has yet to disentangle effects on attentional processes. This
study examined the influence of cortisol and acute psychosocial stress on
attention network performance. In one session, male participants completed
the Attention Network Test (ANT; Fan et al., 2002) before (T1) and after (T2)
participating in a psychosocial stressor (the Trier Social Stress Test; TSST)
or the placebo version of the TSST. Salivary cortisol samples were collected
at baseline (20 mins post-lab entry;T1) and (20 mins post-stressor;T2) points
throughout the study. Participation in the placebo TSST condition yielded
less efficient performance in the alerting measure (though marginally significant) and better efficiency in the executive control measure of the ANT.
The stress (TSST) condition did not yield a change in the performance of
any attention measure. Cortisol reactivity (T2-T1) was a significant predictor of executive control performance at T2. The results of the study indicate
that decreases in cortisol yield better performance in executive control and
increases in cortisol reactivity prevent improvement over time. This study
also adds to research demonstrating that glucocorticoid receptors in the
prefrontal cortex (associated with executive control; Fan et al., 2005) could
contribute to known impairments in executive functioning during stress
(e.g. Arnsten, 2009 for a review; Butts, Weinberg, Young & Phillips, 2011).

F19
EFFECTS OF SHORT-TERM ENVIRONMENTAL ENRICHMENT AND
PHYSICAL EXERCISE ON BEHAVIOUR, MEMORY AND COGNITION
Gaurav Singhal1, Emily Jaehne1, Frances Corrigan2, Bernhard Baune1; 1Psychiatric Neuroscience Lab, School of Medicine, Discipline of Psychiatry, The University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2Discipline of Anatomy and Pathology, School of
Medical Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia — Background:
The beneficial effect of environmental enrichment (EE) with toys and novel
objects and/or physical exercise (Ex) in improving cognition and other
behaviors has been well established. However, little is known about the
distinct effects of short-term EE when used alone and in combination with
Ex on behavior in young and middle aged mice. Methods: C57BL/6 mice
aged either 3 or 8 months old, were housed for one month in cages with
toys and novel objects to act as EE, an exercise wheel for voluntary exercise,
a combination of the two, or with standard housing as a control. At the end
of this period (at either 4 or 9 months), a behavioral battery was undertaken
to assess cognition and depressive like behavior. Results: Ex mice showed
an increase in depressive-like behavior at 4 months, with increased immobility time on the FST (p=0.0038), and impaired cognition, with higher
latencies to find the escape box in the Barnes Maze (p<0.05) compared
to control mice. EE significantly reduced depressive-like behavior on the

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

179

Poster Session F
FST at 9 months (p=0.022) but not at 4 months compared to control mice.
Conclusion: Short-term exercise in mice appears to impair cognition and
increase depression-like behavior at 4 months of age, while EE appears to
reduce depressive-like behavior at 9 months of age. Further experiments on
14 month old mice and with a longer duration of EE are being conducted to
fully elucidate the effects of EE and Ex on behavior.

F20
GREAT EXPECTATIONS: THE ROLE OF SOCIAL RULES IN GUIDING PRO-SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR IN GROUPS WITH HIGH VERSUS
LOW AUTISTIC TRAITS Leila Jameel1, Karishma Vyas1, Giulia Bellesi1, Shelley Channon1; 1University College London — Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)

is a neurodevelopmental condition characterised by social difficulties. A
continuum approach that measures autistic traits in the general population
has proven sensitive for investigating links to cognition, but little work has
explored the relationship with social behaviour. A recent study examining
pro-social behaviour in those high versus low in autistic traits found that
when presented with scenarios depicting characters in need, the high autistic trait group was less pro-social and reported reduced personal reward for
engaging in pro-social behaviour, compared to the low autistic trait group
(Jameel et al., 2014). The present study followed up this work by investigating understanding of the social rules that influence expectations to help
others, and subsequent pro-social behaviour. A novel scenario-based task,
‘Social Expectations’, describing characters in need of help, was administered to students scoring high versus low on the Autism-Spectrum Quotient. Scenarios had two variants, underpinned by either a ‘clear-cut’ or
an ‘ambiguous’ social rule. Participants high in autistic traits were less
pro-social and sympathetic overall towards the characters than those low
in autistic traits. The high trait group gave similar ratings of the characters’
expectations of help, but provided more simplistic and rigid rule-based
explanations. The groups were not differentially affected by the strength
of the social rule. This pattern of relatively intact knowledge of societal
rules, but impaired social/emotional processing, in the context of reduced
pro-social behaviour has implications for informing social skill training
programmes.

F21
“HOW CAN I PUT THIS?” RAISING EVERYDAY AWKWARD ISSUES
IN SOCIAL SITUATIONS IN PEOPLE WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM
DISORDER Giulia Bellesi1, Karishma Vyas1, Leila Jameel1, Shelley Channon1;
1
University College London — Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by marked deficits in social interaction.
It has been associated with abnormalities in a range of brain areas involved
in social and emotional processing. Whilst previous work has explored
the social difficulties encountered by those with ASD, little research has
examined their understanding of the rules underpinning social interactions, and ability to apply these rules. In the present study, neurotypical
participants and those with ASD were presented with a series of scenarios
describing everyday social interactions between two fictional characters.
There were two versions of each scenario, one with two characters familiar
to one another and one with two strangers. In each scenario, the participant
had to decide whether the main character should raise an awkward issue,
and to say how they should phrase this. Participants then made a series of
judgements about the appropriateness of the situations. The results suggested that the participants with ASD were less skilled than the neurotypical group in phrasing their responses, but were similar in their judgments
of the situations. These findings are explained in relation to recent cognitive
and neural accounts of ASD. The implications for developing interventions
to tackle the everyday difficulties experienced by those with ASD are discussed.

F22
PREDICTIVE NEURAL CODES ENHANCE THE PERCEPTION OF
THREATENING STIMULI Tamara Sussman1, Jingwen Jin1, Akos Szekely1,
Aprajita Mohanty1; 1Stony Brook Univeristy — Threatening stimuli exist in

a complex visual environment and require fast, adaptive responses. The
perceptual prioritization of threatening stimuli is attributed to bottom-up
stimulus driven factors. However, expectation of threat due to implicit
or explicit cues enhances perception. According to the predictive coding

180

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
hypothesis, the brain anticipates the forthcoming sensory environment,
generating a template against which observed sensory evidence is matched.
Here we test the hypothesis that the expectation of an emotional stimulus,
rather than a physical encounter with it, is a key factor in improved threat
detection. Participants were cued to detect perceptually degraded fearful
and neutral faces presented at pre-determined ideographic thresholds in
a two-alternative forced-choice perceptual discrimination task while functional resonance imaging (fMRI) data was recorded. Signal detection and
multivariate pattern analyses (MVPA) of fMRI data was conducted. Compared to neutral cues, threatening cues enhanced perceptual sensitivity
(d-prime; t = 2.10, p = .05) and speed (t = 5.80, p < .001) of detection of
upcoming targets. Multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI data show pre(cue-related) and post-stimulus representations of fearful faces are more
positively correlated than pre- and post-stimulus representations of neutral faces in both the amygdala (t = 6.07, p < .001) and fusiform face area
(t = 7.69, p < .001), suggesting that more effective pre-stimulus templates
for threatening faces are instantiated in limbic and face-sensitive sensory
cortex. These findings support the predictive coding theory and establish
the importance of top-down, endogenous factors in the perceptual prioritization of threatening stimuli.

F23
RAPID INVOLVEMENT OF THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX DURING
ATTENTIONAL BIAS TO FEARFUL FACES: A NEAR-INFRARED
SPECTROSCOPY STUDY Robert Torrence1, Keara Kangas1, Joshua Carlson1; 1Northern Michigan University — Orienting attention towards threating

or emotionally valanced stimuli is evolutionarily important for survival.
Previous research has used fearful faces to capture visuospatial attention in
the dot-probe task while measuring brain activity with fMRI. This research
has identified an amygdala – prefrontal network for the orienting of visuospatial attention to emotionally valanced stimuli. However, little is known
about the temporal dynamics of prefrontal cortical activity in attentional
capture by threat. Here, we examined PFC activity using near-infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS)—which has excellent temporal resolution compared
to fMRI—during the dot-probe task with three trial types: baseline (two
neutral faces), congruent (dot appears behind the fearful face), and incongruent (dot appears behind the neutral face). This study had three hypotheses: 1) reaction time (RT) for congruent trials would be significantly faster
than incongruent trials, 2) RT for baseline would be slower than congruent,
but faster than incongruent, and 3) PFC activity would have greater during
congruent and incongruent trials compared to baseline. Congruent trial
were faster than incongruent with baseline falling in between. The NIRS
data indicated that there was a relative increase in oxygenated hemoglobin
(HbO) in the left PFC during congruent and incongruent trials compared to
baseline trials. The data suggests that the left PFC is involved in the engagement and disengagement of visuospatial attention to fearful faces.

F24
FRONTAL THETA PHASE SYNCHRONY AFTER FEEDBACK PRESENTATION PREDICTS BEHAVIORAL ENGAGEMENT Kyle Curham1, Andrew
Bismark2, John Allen1; 1University of Arizona, 2VISN-22 Mental Illness, Research,
Education and Clinical Center (MIRECC), VA San Diego Healthcare System — The

Feedback Related Negativity (FRN) is a medial-frontal event-related potential (ERP) in the theta (4-7 Hz) range that occurs in response to worse-thanexpected feedback. A previous study using the current dataset showed a
diminished FRN when participants passively observed the task, not participating in choice-selection [1]. It has previously been shown that theta
synchrony between medial and lateral frontal sites predicts theta power,
which in turn predicts behavioral adaptation [2,3]. This study compared
inter-trial phase synchrony when participants actively participated or
passively observed a 4-choice gambling task. Participants were presented
with win/loss feedback after each choice. Participants only behaviorally
engaged the task during the self-choice condition. During the first observation condition, participants watched as choices were made by the computer. In a third condition, participants again passively observed, but the
time between choice and feedback was varied. Forty-six participants completed the task with 64 channel EEG data available. Single-trial data were
convolved with complex Morlet wavelets to extract instantaneous power
and phase. Inter-trial phase locking and power Z-scores were computed by
permutation t-tests, and compared between win and loss conditions. Dif-

2015 Annual Meeting
ference scores were entered into a one-way repeated measures ANOVA to
compare between self-choice and observation conditions. Increased phase
locking was observed on loss relative to win trials, only in the self-choice
condition. This suggests that medial frontal inter-trial phase synchrony is a
marker of behavioral engagement.

F25
“YOU SCRATCH MY BACK, AND I MIGHT SCRATCH YOURS” – RECIPROCITY IN GROUPS HIGH AND LOW IN PSYCHOPATHIC TRAITS
Karishma Vyas1, Leila Jameel1, Giulia Bellesi1, Shelley Channon1; 1University College London — Psychopathy is a disorder characterised by impaired affective
processing, interpersonal difficulties, and behavioural problems. A substantial body of work has examined cognitive and emotional functioning in
psychopathy; this has typically been carried out using abstract laboratory
tasks within the prison population. However, very little work has investigated how psychopathic traits in the general population influence everyday social behaviour. The present study examined how individuals high
versus low in self-reported psychopathic personality traits performed on
a novel measure of reciprocity in social interactions. Participants were presented with a series of scenarios in which they chose whether to reciprocate
a social favour. Each scenario had two variants in order to manipulate the
value of the social favour, such that reciprocal actions were advantageous
to the participant in one variant, and disadvantageous in the other. Participants were asked to decide the extent to which they would reciprocate by
selecting amongst alternative courses of action, and to rate how satisfied
they would feel with each alternative. As predicted, the high psychopathic
trait group was significantly less reciprocal than the low psychopathic trait
group, and reported significantly less satisfaction with reciprocal courses
of action. However, the groups were not differentially influenced by the
type of variant (advantageous or disadvantageous). All participants were
more likely to reciprocate in the advantageous condition, and also reported
greater satisfaction with reciprocal actions in this condition. The potential
long-term implications of the findings for increasing prosocial behaviour in
individuals with psychopathic traits are discussed.

F26
CONTEXTUAL LEARNING AND THREAT DETECTION Akos Szekely1,
Suparna Rajaram1, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1SUNY Stony Brook University — It is

hypothesized that threatening stimuli are detected better than neutral stimuli due to bottom-up stimulus-related factors. However, stimuli are not
perceived in isolation; they exist embedded in a rich global context consisting of other stimuli. Robust memory of regularities within these visual contexts guides faster detection of embedded targets, as demonstrated by the
contextual cuing effect (Chun & Jiang, 1998; Chun & Phelps, 1999). Using
variants of the contextual cuing task in which a threatening schematic
face appeared in spatial configurations of faces that were either novel or
repeated, the present study tests whether contexts can be learned to more
effectively guide detection of threatening than neutral targets. Participants
(N=24) detected threatening faces faster (no speed-accuracy tradeoffs)
across trial blocks in repeated versus novel contexts, F(2, 21) = 7.40, p =
0.01, establishing that contextual learning guides detection of threatening
stimuli. In the next experiment, we limited display exposure time and compared threat versus neutral detection times. Participants (N=33) detected
threatening faces faster (again, no speed-accuracy tradeoffs) than neutral
faces across trial blocks more in repeated versus novel contexts, F(3, 84) =
3.67, p < 0.05, with steeper learning slopes in repeated contexts for threatening targets than for neutral targets, t(3) = -10.73, p < 0.01 or for threatening
targets in novel contexts, t(3) = 4.89, p < 0.05. Present findings indicate that
contextual learning occurs more effectively when threatening stimuli are
present, and demonstrate how memory and attention interact to optimize
visual processing of threatening stimuli.

F27
NEURAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CORRELATES OF EMOTIONAL
FACE PERCEPTION IN PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS Amri Sabharwal1,
Prerona Mukherjee1, Akos Szekely1, Roman Kotov1, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1Stony
Brook University — Deficits in emotional face perception are prominent

impairments in schizophrenia, and their biological correlates have been
recommended as viable candidates for biomarker development by the cognitive neuroscience treatment research to improve cognition in schizophre-

Poster Session F
nia (CNTRICS) initiative. Emotional face perception has also been found
to be a strong predictor of quality of life and functioning in schizophrenia.
However, it is unclear whether emotion perception-related deficits and
imaging biomarkers are specific to schizophrenia or present generally in
psychosis, and whether they predict real-world functioning. In the present study, behavioural and fMRI data were recorded while patients with
schizophrenia (SZ; N=24), other psychoses (OP; N=26), and controls (NP;
N=29) performed a task matching faces based either on emotion or on identity. A 3x2 repeated measures ANOVA showed a significant interaction
effect between diagnostic group and matching condition. Compared to NP
and OP, SZ showed worse accuracy for matching emotions than matching
identity. This deficit correlated with higher negative symptoms and worse
social functioning and global assessment of functioning (GAF) scores.
Preliminary neuroimaging results show that, in SZ, during emotion face
matching there is greater activity in fusiform gyrus and inferior occipital
gyrus, regions involved in processing identity of faces. Coupled with worse
emotion matching performance in SZ and correlation with symptom-related and real-world functioning measures, present findings establish the
importance of emotion perception measures in SZ and highlight the value
of imaging biomarkers in informing clinical applications.

F28
INTEGRATION OF EXPECTED STIMULUS SALIENCY AND PROBABILITY ENHANCES PERCEPTION: EVIDENCE FROM PERCEPTUAL PSYCHOPHYSICS AND MULTIVARIATE PATTERN ANALYSES
(MVPA) Jingwen Jin1, Tamara Sussman1, Aprajita Mohanty1; 1SUNY-Stony Brook
University — Studies show that expectation of threatening stimuli results
in faster and more accurate detection of upcoming stimuli. These studies
manipulated expectation by selectively biasing processing of threatening
or neutral stimuli. In the present study we manipulated the probability of
occurrence of upcoming stimuli. In a two-alternative forced-choice perceptual discrimination task, participants used 25%, 50%, and 75% likelihood
cues to detect perceptually degraded threatening or neutral faces presented
at their pre-determined perceptual threshold, while functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) data were recorded. Behavioral pilot results
(N=29) showed greater perceptual sensitivity (d-prime) for threatening
versus neutral, F (1, 28)=18.24, p<0.001 and high versus low probability, F
(2,56)=5.26, p<0.005) cues. An interaction in RT, F (2,56)=5.55, p<0.005 indicates faster detection of faces following high probability threatening but not
neutral cues. Preliminary searchlight MVPA of fMRI data (N=3) indicates
that local pattern representations of threatening and neutral cues are more
distinguishable at higher (75%) than lower probability (25%) conditions
(p<0.001, uncorrected, 100-voxel cluster extension) in superior occipital and
inferior parietal lobes indicating these regions integrate salience and probability-related information. Future analyses will examine whether, compared to neutral cues, ensemble codes for high probability threatening cues
better predict upcoming threatening stimuli than low probability cues, further clarifying the neural mechanisms by which the brain integrates prior
saliency and probability information to enhance perception.

F29
CHRONIC VIOLENT VIDEO GAMERS: AVOIDANT, BUT IN CONTROL
Robert T. Palumbo1, Laura Stockdale2, Kavita Patel3, Rebecca L. Silton4, Robert
G. Morrison5; 1Loyola University Chicago — Media violence research has shown

an association between media violence exposure and increased aggression,
and decreased prosocial behavior. Participants who played a violent video
game for 20 minutes more quickly and accurately identified angry faces as
opposed to happy faces (Kirsh & Mounts, 2007). Researchers have shown
that abnormal facial processing and poor behavioral regulation abilities are
related to aggression; however, no known research has examined the influence of chronic exposure to violent video games on the neural correlates of
emotional face processing and inhibitory control. 31 chronic violent video
gamers (CVVG; 30+ hours/week playing violent video games) and 31 nonchronic gamers (control; <5 hours/week playing non-violent action games)
male undergraduate students completed a stop-signal task using equally
arousing fearful and happy faces while brain activity was recorded using
scalp electroencephalography (EEG). Participants were asked to identify
the gender of the faces with no explicit mention of emotion, and to inhibit
their response when a stop-signal appeared. No behavioral differences
were observed across groups in gender discrimination or stopping accu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

181

Poster Session F
racy or reaction time (RT). However, CVVGs displayed reduced occipital
P100 amplitude relative to controls. CVVGs also displayed reduced central P300 amplitude on stop trials compared to controls. We believe in this
context the reduction in the P100 amplitude suggests that the CVVGs have
reduced early attention for emotional faces while the reduced P300 amplitude is reflective of less resources recruited to inhibit behavior (Ramautar et
al., 2004). These results illustrate the potential risks and benefits of violent
video gaming.

F30
LISTENING TO THE BIG PICTURE: THE EFFECTS OF MUSIC-INDUCED AROUSAL ON CREATIVITY AND PERCEPTUAL SCOPE
Michael Coffel1, Renee Schapiro1, Denise Evert1; 1Skidmore College — The pres-

ent set of experiments was designed to test the effects of music-induced
arousal on creative performance and the underlying cognitive mechanisms
mediating the observed effects. Experiment 1 identified musical selections that were sufficiently high and low on arousal as well as an appropriate control condition. In Experiment 2, participants were exposed to a
music condition while completing a battery of creativity assessments and
the Navon task. We hypothesized that 1) participants exposed to high
arousal music would have faster response times to the global than local
targets because arousal engenders a broader attentional scope and 2) have
enhanced performance on divergent thinking creativity tests (Alternative
Uses and Abbreviated Torrance Test) and impaired performance on convergent thinking creativity tests (Remote Associates Test) because a broader
perceptual scope engenders a broader conceptual scope, facilitating novel,
but appropriate solutions. Conversely, we hypothesised that participants
exposed to low arousal music would exhibit the opposite pattern of results
due to a narrowed attentional scope. We found support for our hypotheses
only when arousal was included in the analysis, suggesting that arousal
mediates the observed effects of music on creative performance.

F31
MOXIFLOXACIN INDUCED PSYCHOSIS Arman Fesharaki1, Ramotse
Saunders; 1SUNY Downstate Medical Center — Fluoroquinolones, a broad
spectrum antibiotic frequently used in medical units for upper respiratory infections and urinary tract infections, have been demonstrated to
cause drug induced mental status changes (Farrington et al. 1995). These
changes, though reportedto be less than 0.1%, could potentially manifest
themselves as delusional thought process and hallucinations ( Blondeau
et al. 1999, Perry etal. 1999). One theory proposed to explain this rare phenomena is the blockage of GABA receptor-binding, in turn causing secondary excitatory changes as per measured EEG recordings (Segev et al. 1988)
The reported patient is a 91 year old woman with prior medical history
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), hypertension, hyperlipidemia , coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease and without
prior psychiatric history. The patient was admitted to the inpatient medical
unit for management of COPD exacerbation, for which she was started on
oxygen therapy, prednisone 40mg tab PO daily (the patient was on long
term prednisone regimen), montelukast 10mg tab PO every evening at
7pm, as well as Moxifloxacin 400mg tab PO dailyOn the following evening
after her admission, the patient became acutely agitated, displaying paranoid delusions comprised of patient believing that the inpatient nurses and
staff members were trying to steal her belonging and kill her along with
another neighboring patient. Despite multiple behavioral interventions
from the inpatient staff members, the patient remained acutely agitated.

F32
AMBIVALENT VERSUS UNIFORM ATTITUDES TOWARD PRC CHINESE: NEURAL IMAGING EVIDENCES INDUCED BY CONTEXTUAL
CUES I-Ching Lee1, Yu-Hsuan Sun1; 1Department of Psychology, National
Chengchi University — Ambivalence is the coexistence of positive and negative attitudes towards the same target. Due to the intricate relationship
Taiwan has with PRC China, the Taiwanese may hold ambivalent attitudes towards PRC China. Few studies had examined neural activities of
ambivalence induced by contextual cues. We conducted this research to
address such a question. We hypothesized that when a war concept was
primed by contextual cues, people with ambivalent attitudes towards PRC
China (the ambivalent group) should show different neutral activities from
those with uniform attitudes towards PRC China (the uniform groups).

182

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
The current study used the fMRI technique to examine brain activities of
the two groups. All participants were asked to first indicate the country of
the pictures (to establish the baseline brain activities), and then to indicate
their preferences towards pictures (i.e., a preference task) mixed with three
countries (i.e., UK, PRC China, & Taiwan). In the preference task, pictures
of countries were showed in two conditions (mixed with pictures of wars
or of natural disaster). We found that when a war concept was primed, the
ambivalent group showed more activities in right inferior occipital gyrus
(BA 18) when indicating their preference towards PRC China, suggesting
more visual processing on affective information. Conversely, when a war
concept was primed, the uniform group showed more activities in left
superior temporal gyrus (BA 39) when indicating their preference towards
UK and Taiwan, suggesting more cognitive processing on integrating information. Further implications regarding affective and cognitive information
processing and ambivalence were offered.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
F33
CAN YOU RECOGNIZE YOUR OWN FINGER SNAPPING SOUND?
– ERP CORRELATES OF PRE-REFLECTIVE (EARLY) AUDITORY
SELF-PERCEPTION Christoph Justen1, Cornelia Herbert2; 1German Sport
University Cologne, Institute of Psychology, Department of Performance Psychology, Cologne, Germany, 2University of Tübingen, Department of Psychiatry and
Department of Biomedical Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Tübingen, Germany
— Every day we are interacting with our environment and thereby differ-

entiate between self- and other-generated information. Especially the processing of self-generated movement information plays a major role in our
daily lives as we are often engaged in social physical activities requiring
hand- and finger movements with characteristic sounds (e.g. finger snapping or clapping). Until now, studies on this topic have mainly focused
on investigating reflective (late) self-related processing of movement-related unimodal visual or multimodal stimuli. The present study used selfversus other-generated movement sounds (finger snapping sounds) and
electroencephalography (EEG) to study the temporal and neural dynamics
of pre-reflective self-related processing based on complex (movement-related) auditory information. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded
from 64 electrode sites while healthy participants (N=12, 6 males, 6 females)
listened to self or other-generated finger snapping sounds. Stimuli were
presented during a passive standard oddball paradigm consisting of 2
blocks (“self” as standard, “other” as deviant stimulus and vice versa).
Block order was counterbalanced across subjects. Preliminary data analysis
revealed that ERPs elicited by the subject’s self-generated finger snapping
sounds were significantly different from those evoked by other-generated finger snapping sounds. In particular, ERP grand average plots show
differences between the processing of self- and other-related movement
sounds, starting already in the time-window of endogenous ERP components (P100, mismatch negativity [MMN] and N200). Our findings provide
first evidence for an early, bottom-up driven differentiation mechanism
in the processing of complex self- and other-related auditory information
based on sensory memory processes.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
F34
DEVELOPMENTAL DIFFERENCES IN PREFRONTAL AND SUBCORTICAL ACTIVITY DURING AN EMOTIONAL WORKING MEMORY
TASK Sofie Cromheeke1, Sven Mueller1; 1Ghent University — Theories of adolescent behaviour attribute increases in risk-taking and sensation seeking
in this age group to a heightened sensitivity to emotional stimuli (due to
increased ventral striatal and amygdala activation) on the one hand and
a relatively immature cognitive control system (decreased prefrontal activation) on the other hand. The goal of the current study was to outline to
what extent relevant and irrelevant emotional stimuli bias the imbalance
between affective processing and cognitive control. Twenty-four adolescents (16 females, aged 12-16) and 28 adults (14 females, aged 25-35) com-

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F

pleted two attentional conditions of an emotional face working memory
0-back/2-back task while undergoing fMRI. Participants were asked to
attend to the emotional facial expression in the ‘relevant’ emotion condition, and to the gender of the face in the ‘irrelevant’ condition. Analyses
focused on regions-of-interest supporting cognitive control - especially
working memory - (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC)) and emotion processing (amygdala and
ventral striatum). Both adults and adolescents showed greater right VLPFC
activation in response to angry compared to happy and neutral faces. A
similar pattern was observed in the right DLPFC in adults, but not adolescents. This finding might represent adolescents’ immaturity in mobilizing
additional cognitive resources in the face of emotional information. Furthermore, adolescents exhibited less left amygdala deactivation for angry
compared to happy and neutral faces in the ‘irrelevant’ condition. In sum,
these findings indicate developmental differences in the functioning of
fronto-limbic systems as proposed by neurobiological theories of adolescent behaviour.

8.66 years, SD=0.57) completed demographic assessments, a graded exercise test to assess cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF), cognitive tests and structural and functional MRI. Fronto-executive (FE) and frontal parietal (FP)
network FC was calculated by averaging pair-wise FC between regions
of interest in each network. Variability of the BOLD signal was measured
by calculating both the mean squared successive difference (MSSD) and
the standard deviation of the squared successive difference (SSSD) within
each network region to better characterize signal fluctuation patterns.
Results support an interaction with sex. Females demonstrated negative
associations between fitness and FC (FE: r=-.500,p=.008;FP:r=-.442,p=.021)
and fitness and FP SSSD (r=-.387,p=.046), as well as positive associations
between accuracy switch cost (higher=poorer switch ability) and FP FC
(r=.408,p=.035). Males did not have significant relationships between fitness and FC or SSSD in either network or switching cost and FC or SSSD
in either network (all p-values >.05). Results suggest sex-specific trends in
how fitness relates to brain function and executive function performance in
preadolescents.

F35
COGNITIVE CONTROL AND EMOTION REGULATION: COMMON
NEURAL SUBSTRATES AMONG RESPONSE INHIBITION,
IMPLICIT, AND INTENTIONAL DOWN-REGULATION OF EMOTION
FMRI PARADIGMS Jennifer Townsend1, Vizueta Nathalie1, Bookheimer

F37
TEMPORAL ORDER MEMORY ABILITIES IN YOUNG, MIDDLE-AGED, AND OLDER ADULTS MAY DEPEND ON LEVEL OF
INTERFERENCE Lindsay J. Rotblatt1, Catherine A. Sumida1, Emily J. Van

1

1 1

Susan , Altshuler Lori ; University of California, Los Angeles — Emotion regulation studies consistently show ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC)
activation and suggest an essential role of this region in “controlling” emotion via modifying limbic activity. Few studies explore common neural
substrates underlying intentional vs implicit emotion down-regulation.
Furthermore, response inhibition studies show vlPFC recruitment during
cognitive control via modifying striatal activity. Little is known about
shared and distinct activation patterns in different emotion regulation and
cognitive control strategies. This study sought to directly compare cognitive and emotion regulation in the same subjects. fMRI data was collected
during 3 paradigms: response inhibition using GoNoGo, implicit emotion
regulation using the Faces task and conscious emotion regulation using
cognitive reappraisal of negative stimuli from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS). 17 healthy participants completed all 3 tasks
(mean age=32.8±9.6; 9M/8F). A repeated-measures 3-level analysis was
performed with regulatory contrasts (Nogo-Go; Identify Emotion-Match
Shape; Decrease Negative- Look Negative) entered as the within-subject
factor. This analysis generated across-task contrasts, which were then
entered in a random effects model. Results revealed extensive overlap in
activation of bilateral vlPFC (BA44/45/47), as well as other frontal regions,
including bilateral inferior frontal gyri, middle and superior frontal gyri
and medial prefrontal cortex. Significant activation was seen also in bilateral parietal lobules, occipital cortices and throughout the striatum. These
findings suggest the vlPFC’s central role in adaptive responses across cognitive and emotional domains. This provides a framework for understanding internal and external regulatory processes and may help discern factors
contributing to psychopathology and its treatment.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development
& aging
F36
DIFFERENTIAL RELATIONSHIPS OF FITNESS, EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND BRAIN FUNCTION IN MALE AND FEMALE PREADOLESCENTS Rachel Clark1, Laura Chaddock-Heyman2, Charles H. Hillman2,
Arthur F. Kramer2, Michelle W. Voss1; 1University of Iowa, 2University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign — Fitness is consistently associated with better executive

function performance across the lifespan, but the neural mechanism for this
relationship has not been fully characterized. Brain networks derived from
resting BOLD signal may provide a link for further understanding this relationship. Based on differing developmental trajectories, the relationship
between fitness and executive functions in preadolescents may also differ
by sex. This study examined average functional connectivity (FC) within
two networks associated with executive function in relation to task-switching performance. Forty-eight 8-9 year old preadolescents (28 female; Age =

Etten1, Jacob D. Hileman1, Gabrielle M. Wagner1, Eva Pirogovsky Turk2,3, Jerlyn
C. Tolentino1, Paul E. Gilbert1,4; 1Department of Psychology, San Diego State
University, San Diego, CA, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of California
San Diego, San Diego, CA, 3Veterans Affairs, San Diego Health Care System, San
Diego, CA, 4San Diego State University - University of California San Diego Joint
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, CA — Memory for the tem-

poral order of items or events in a sequence has been shown to be impaired
in older adults compared to young adults. However, less is known about
temporal order memory abilities in middle age. The present study sought
to examine the effects of temporal interference on memory for sequences
of visuospatial stimuli across the adult lifespan. Young adults (18-25 years;
n=60), middle aged adults (40-55 years; n=43), and older adults (65+ years;
n=43) completed a visuospatial temporal order memory test involving high
and low levels of temporal interference. Results demonstrated that at low
levels of temporal interference both the young and middle-aged adults significantly outperformed the older adults (p < .05). However at high levels
of interference, the young adults significantly outperformed middle-aged
adults, and middle-aged adults significantly outperformed older adults (p
< .05). Thus during middle age, temporal order memory for sequences of
stimuli may remain relatively stable in situations when interference is low.
However, temporal order memory may begin to decline as early as middle
age in situations when interference is high. The findings suggest that tests
of temporal order memory may be useful in detecting cognitive change in
middle age and older adulthood. Given the importance of temporal order
memory in activities of daily living, the present findings also may have
important everyday implications.

F38
DEVELOPMENT OF FLUID REASONING ABILITIES IN SCHOOL
AGE CHILDREN Isabelle Soulières1, Eliane Danis1, Nelly Nedeltcheva1; 1University of Quebec at Montreal (Canada) — Fluid reasoning, inferring logical

solutions to novel problems, is considered one of the main pillars of human
learning and cognition. Solving analogies, such as a fireman is to a fire
truck what an astronaut is to ____, is a type of fluid reasoning requiring the
ability to jointly consider different relations between the items in order to
solve the problem. There are individual and developmental differences in
preferential use of visuospatial representations versus the use of rules and
propositions when solving reasoning problems. The goal of our study was
to investigate the development of fluid reasoning in school-aged children
(n=34, data collection still undergoing, 6-13 years). Children completed an
intellectual evaluation (Raven’s Progressive Matrices; RPM) computerized
task of relational reasoning involving visuospatial versus semantic content (e.g. geometric figures versus drawings of known objects). Problems
were presented as 2x2 matrices with the last entry missing and varied in
complexity (0-relation, 1-relation, and 2-relations to jointly consider) and
in content (visuospatial or semantic analogies). Preliminary results confirm
that 2-rel. problems were less successfully completed than the 1-rel. and

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

183

Poster Session F
0-rel. problems, more so in younger children. The ability to solve complex
visuospatial versus semantic problems did not develop at the same rate.
Also, the correlation between children’s performance on the RPM and their
performance on the relational task was stronger for complex problems than
simpler problems. These results suggest developmental shifts in the abilities to solve semantic versus visuospatial analogies, and individual differences in abilities for these two types of reasoning.

F39
CHANGE IN CEREBRAL BLOOD FLOW IN THE VISUAL CORTEX TO
A FLASHING CHECKERBOARD CORRELATES WITH MEASURES
OF EXECUTIVE FUNCTION IN OLDER ADULTS Benjamin Zimmerman1,
Bradley P. Sutton1, Kathy A. Low1, Chin Hong Tan1, Mark A. Fletcher1, Nils Schneider-Garces1, Edward L. Maclin1, Gabriele Gratton1, Monica Fabiani1; 1University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Cognitive declines, especially in tasks that
require executive function, are associated with normal aging, and are likely
to be linked to age-related changes in cerebrovascular health. In order to
gain a better understanding of the relationships between age, cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF), cerebral blood flow (CBF), and cognition, arterial spin
labelling (ASL), a functional magnetic resonance technique, was used to
study the CBF in healthy older adults ranging in age from 56-88. Previous research in our lab using the same method found that estimated CRF
fully mediated the age effects on the mean CBF over frontal and parietal
cortices, but was unable to demonstrate a relationship between mean CBF
and cognitive function. Here we present an extension of this analysis to the
visual cortex, using data collected on a subset of those participants one year
later. We expanded our previous findings, showing that CRF fully mediated the effects of age on mean CBF in the gray matter of the visual cortex.
In addition, we found that the change in CBF associated with activation to
a flashing checkerboard, but not the mean CBF, was associated with neuropsychological measures of executive function. These results indicate that
the impact of CRF on age-related declines in blood flow is relevant across
the brain, even in areas that are thought to be less affected by normal aging,
such as the visual cortex. However, measures of cognitive function seem
to be related more strongly to measures of activation CBF rather than the
baseline CBF.

F40
INCREASED GLOBAL EFFICIENCY AND RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY IN DEFAULT MODE, FRONTO-PARIETAL
AND SALIENCE NETWORKS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED
HARM AVOIDANCE IN RISK-TAKING ADOLESCENTS Samuel J.
DeWitt1, Micaela Y. Chan1, Francesca M. Filbey1; 1The University of Texas at
Dallas — Hyperconnectivity between PFC-amygdala/ventral striatum

were found for risk-taking adolescents, which may indicate inefficient
network connectivity (DeWitt, Aslan & Filbey, 2014). The present study
takes a graph-based approach (Bullmore & Sporns 2009) to investigate
how brain network organization is associated with risk-taking behaviors
among adolescents. We hypothesized that increased global efficiency (GE)
will be observed in non risk-taking compared to risk-taking adolescents in
3 networks: default mode network (DMN), fronto-parietal network (FPN;
cognitive control) and salience network (SN; directed attention). Methods:
Thirty-three adolescents (Mage=14,15 males) underwent a resting-state
fMRI scan (risk-taking N=17). Using 264 nodes and network labels from
Power et al. (2011), a node-by-node correlation matrix was computed for
each participant. GE was calculated for each participant using BCT Toolbox
(Rubinov & Sporns, 2010). Results: GE and mean network connectivity did
not differ between risk-taking and non risk-taking adolescents. However,
within the risk-taking group, harm avoidance was correlated with all three
networks in terms of GE (rDMN=.47, rFPN=.63, rSN=.61, all p < .05 and
mean network connectivity (rDMN=.54, rFPN=.64, rSN=.59, all p < .05). In
the non-risk-taking group, connectivity and GE in the DMN was negatively
correlated with novelty-seeking (r=-.60, p <.01). Discussion: Contrary to our
prediction, increased GE and heightened connectivity was associated with
increased harm avoidance only in the risk-taking adolescents. This suggests
that better organization of these networks is associated with active harm
avoidance in risk-taking adolescents. Such information provides a useful
neurocognitive profile of potential protective factors against more serious
risk-taking behavior in vulnerable adolescents.

184

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

F41
NEURAL, DEMOGRAPHIC AND LIFESTYLE CORRELATES OF
AGGREGATE COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE AND SUCCESSFUL
COGNITIVE AGEING David Samu1, Rik Henson2, . Cam-CAN3, Lorraine K
Tyler1; 1University of Cambridge, 2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, 3Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN), University of
Cambridge — Although age-related differences in performance in most cognitive domains have been frequently reported, there have only been limited
attempts to integrate these differences across domains into a single estimate of cognitive ageing and identify its demographic, lifestyle and neural
correlates. In the present study, we characterise cognitive health index
(CHI) as the common factor underlying performance across a diverse set of
behavioural measures, including reasoning, memory, motor function and
language. The basis of our analysis is a large, population-derived sample
(N = 452, aged 25-85) from the Cambridge Centre for Ageing and Neuroscience (www.cam-can.org), that allows for testing both age-independent
and age-related factors of cognitive health. Validating our approach, we
found the obtained CHI to correlate with widely-used medical diagnostic measures of dementia and cognitive impairment (ACER and MMSE).
Key demographic, lifestyle and mental health variables, such as education
level, reading, smoking, depression and anxiety, were also significantly
correlated with CHI across the entire age range. In contrast, a composite
measure of social connectedness exhibited increasing correlation with CHI
only for participants older than 65, highlighting its importance in successful
ageing. Voxel-based morphometry analysis of grey matter volume showed
a significant correlation between bilateral frontal regions and CHI. Furthermore, we found that CHI is highly related to integrity of white-matter tracts
connecting the frontal lobe to posterior cortical areas (superior longitudinal
fasciculus) and to the thalamus (anterior internal capsule). These findings
represent a step toward an integrated, multi-level explanation of healthy
cognitive functioning and successful cognitive ageing.

F42
COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY, WHITE MATTER AND HEALTHY AGING:
A DTI STUDY OF 168 PARTICIPANTS. Daniel Rinker1, Talia M. Nir1, Neda
Jahanshad1, Derrek P. Hibar1, The ADNI2, Artemis Zavaliangos-Petropulu1, Paul M.
Thompson1; 1Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging & Informatics,
Dept. of Neurology, USC Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, United States,
2
The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, San Francisco, United States —
Cognitive flexibility—the ability to rapidly switch between cognitive sets—
is a fundamental indicator of neurological health, and is important in neurological aging. It is often operationally measured as “set-shifting,” with the
Trail-Making Test (TMT). Poor performance on this task is associated with
cognitive impairments, decline and brain disease. fMRI studies of the TMT
implicate different brain regions important for various subcomponents of
the task, such as processing speed, motor tasks and visual scanning. These
different regions may work in concert, forming a functional neural circuit.
Communication between these regions—facilitated by white matter (WM)
association tracts—is crucial. Using diffusion tensor imaging, we related
individual differences in white matter status to task performance, to investigate (1) the cognitive construct of set-shifting and (2) how it relates to
brain aging. As part of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative,
Diffusion tensor imaging data, along with neuropsychological testing data,
was acquired from 168 participants (mean age 73.5 ± 7.4; 120 M 91 F; 55
Control, 113 Mild Cognitive Impairment). We looked at how corrected time
to completion on parts A and B of the TMT was associated with fractional
anisotropy and mean diffusivity in WM tracts. In ROI-based regression
analyses, FA and MD were correlated (P<0.05, FDR corrected q<0.003) with
task performance in several tracts selected a priori: L Superior longitudinal
fasiculus, L&R Fornix, Corpus Callosum, and L Cingulum, in controls and
MCI patients. These results are consistent with the neural circuit hypothesis
and support set-shifting as a neural correlate of healthy neurological aging.

F43
EXTENDED TRAINING ALLEVIATES SPATIAL LEARNING AND
MEMORY DEFICITS IN A MODEL OF FETAL ALCOHOL SPECTRUM
DISORDER Katherine Yanagi1, Thuy Hua1, Kerry Thompson1; 1Occidental College — Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is an umbrella term used to

2015 Annual Meeting
describe neurodevelopmental deficits associated with exposure to ethanol
in utero. Using a rat model of FASD, we examined the deficits caused by
cell death within the hippocampus during the critical period of hippocampal synaptogenesis. Intraperitoneal injection of diazepam (30 mg/kg), a
drug that mimics some of the effects of ethanol, at postnatal day 7 (P7) has
been shown to induce cell loss in the hippocampus. We evaluated cell death
in the limbic structures using a hematoxylin and eosin stain, and found
evidence of degeneration in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and subiculum using a semi-quantitative scale. Since the hippocampus plays a role
in spatial navigation, we examined spatial learning and memory with the
Morris water maze behavioral task. We observed that rats exposed to diazepam (n=5) at P7 and tested 2 months later showed deficits when compared
to the controls (n=3). When tested with probe trials after five days of training, rats exposed to diazepam spent significantly less time moving towards
the platform zone (control 30.47±0.93, diazepam 28.34±0.23, p<0.05). These
deficits were not observed after a ten-day training period. When retested
in the probe trial after ten days of training, no difference was observed
between control and diazepam animals (control 30.67±1.09, diazepam
29.32±0.93, p>0.05). The results of this study suggest that overtraining alleviates the deficits associated with FASD and merits further investigation
into extended training period protocols. These data, may suggest potential
prophylactic strategies for learning deficits associated with FASD.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
F44
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY
CAPACITY: AN INTERPLAY OF GATING AND ENCODING Nina
Hiebel1,2, Hubert D. Zimmer1,2; 1Saarland University, 2The International Research
Training Group “Adaptive Minds” — The capacity of visual working memory

(WM) is highly limited making it considerably important to select only the
most relevant objects. Consequentially, individual differences in visual
WM are partially due to attention-memory interactions which can happen
at multiple stages of processing. It was already shown that low-capacity
individuals are poorer in controlling which information accesses WM.
We report data providing evidence that people differing in WM capacity
already differ in early gating mechanisms enabling the selection of relevant
items (N1). Participants performed a visual change detection task in which
it was necessary to remember the orientation of either two or five rectangles in either the left or right hemifield, as indicated by a cue, while we
recorded event-related potentials. After a brief delay memory was tested.
On one third of the trials (=filtering), participants were required to select
only the relevant rectangles indicated by a certain color presented among
distractors. We compared the N1 elicited in the filtering condition with
trials that did not require discriminating between relevant target features.
Specifically, we expected lower amplitude in the filtering condition than set
size five if early selection processes already boost the gating of task relevant
stimuli. This N1 effect of the selection process was found for high- but not
low-WM capacity individuals. Additionally, the decrement in amplitude
in the filtering condition to set size five was larger for high- than low-WM
capacity individuals and it correlated negatively with the unnecessary storage of task irrelevant information.

F45
THE SOMATOTOPY OF MENTAL TACTILE IMAGES Timo T Schmidt1,2,
Felix Blankenburg1,2; 1Neurocomputation and Neuroimaging Unit (NNU), Freie
Universität Berlin, Germany, 2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience,
Berlin, Germany — The role of prefrontal cortices in mental imagery and

working memory is often referred to as ‘cognitive control’ while sensory
cortices are considered as ‘mental sketchpads’. Representation of mental
content is considered as interaction of abstract/conceptual aspects (prefrontal) and analog/depictive properties in sensory regions. Here we utilize cortical somatotopy in a mental imagery task to depict lateralization
principles in both, prefrontal and sensory regions. Subjects perceived or
imagined vibrotactile stimuli on a 2x4-pin Braille-like display (QuaeroSys)
at four different body locations: left/right thumbs and left/right big toes
(2x4 design). 19 subjects were scanned on a 3T Siemens Trio (TR = 2s, whole

Poster Session F
brain) for three runs (á 11min) comprising blocks of 8s duration (ISI=12s)
of perception or imagery, supplemented with null-events. After every run
subjects rated the vividness/clearness of their mental images/percepts for
all eight conditions. To test if tactile imagery relies on somatotopic sensory
cortices we computed GLM contrasts and conjunction analyses between
corresponding imagery and perception conditions. Next, we tested for
lateralized processes by contrasting imagery of left and right body parts.
Finally, we present connectivity changes related to the construction and
maintenance of the mental image. Our analyses indicate somatotopic
recruitment of primary somatosensory cortex during imagery while rather
BA2 than BA1 or BA3a/b was activated. Together with previous reports
(i.e. Schmidt et al., Neuroimage 2014) this is in line with the view that the
‘finer grained’ a mental images is, hierarchically lower cortices are recruited
to augment fine sensory details to an abstract mental representation.

F46
CAUSAL ROLE OF THE PREFRONTAL CORTEX IN THE TOP-DOWN
MODULATION OF SENSORY PROCESSING AND WORKING
MEMORY Neda Perwez1, Tsukasa Kamigaki1, Yang Dan1,2; 1University of California, Berkeley, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute — Prefrontal cortex plays a

critical role in higher cognitive functions such as selective attention, object
recognition, stimulus processing, and retention of information. The objective of this project is to determine the causal role of the pre-frontal cortex
(PFC) in the top-down control of sensory processing and working memory
(WM). To test the causal role of PFC-mediated top-down modulation, mice
were trained on visual and an auditory delayed response tasks. Laser stimulation of PFC during visual and auditory delay response tasks developed
an association between sensory processing and working memory by dissociating the performance into: expectation, encoding, maintenance, and
retrieval. To quantify the relationship between PFC and sensory processing, we calculated d-prime as a measure of retrieval accuracy by subtracting standardized false alarm rates from standardized hit rates. Stimulation
of PFC led to an improvement in d-prime value. This suggests that sensory
processing of stimulus improves as a result of increased activity in PFC
during working memory dependent tasks.

F48
THE INFLUENCE OF OBJECT ARRANGEMENT IN VISUAL WORKING
MEMORY: EFFECTS ON POSTERIOR BRAIN AREAS Michel Quak1,
Durk Talsma1; 1Ghent University — In a series of experiments we examined

whether object arrangement in visual working memory (WM) can influence WM capacity, performance, and the activation of posterior brain areas.
We used a change detection paradigm and simultaneous EEG recording to
examine the Contralateral Negative Slow Wave (CNSW), a neural correlate
of visual WM capacity. Four abstract objects were presented in each visual
hemifield. Participants were prompted to remember one object worth of
visual information in one hemifield for 1000 milliseconds. The complexity
of the arrangement of visual information that needed to be remembered
could relate to either a single object, a single half of two separate objects, or
one quarter of four separate objects (for a total of one entire object in each
case). All objects had the same surface area and consisted of the same visual
features, keeping basic visual information equal across conditions. Behavioral results indicate that performance decreased with increased complexity of arrangement. ERP results show increased negativity over parietal and
occipital recording sites during memorization, contralateral to the location
of the memorized item. The CNSW was significantly more negative for the
half and quarter conditions, compared to the whole object condition, suggesting that the more complex arrangements increased memory load. Since
the actual amount of visual information was kept equal for all conditions,
these results suggest that activation in posterior brain areas is not only due
to processing of visual information; it might, at least partially, reflect the
interaction between contextual and visual information processing.

F49
LOAD-DEPENDENT NEURAL PATTERNS WITHIN SUPERIOR
INTRAPARIETAL CORTEX REFLECT THE DETERIORATION OF
PRECISION IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Elena Galeano Weber1,2,
Benjamin Peters3, Tim Hahn1, Christoph Bledowski3, Christian J. Fiebach1,2;
1
Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, 2IDeA Center
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

185

Poster Session F
for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany — Recent work

has established that working memory (WM) capacity limitations depend
on the number of items that can be stored and the precision with which
they can be stored. Further, it was suggested that performance impairments
under high WM load may result from a decrease in WM precision as well
as an increased variability of precision across trials. We used fMRI (n =
22, color WM, continuous response format) to explore the neural mechanisms underlying individual differences in WM precision and variability.
Precision, variability, and guessing rate (variable precision model) were
estimated separately for each subject and load (1,3,5). Across participants,
precision declined with increasing load, while guess rate and between-trial
variability of precision increased. A load-related activation increase was
found in a broad bilateral frontoparietal network, including visual areas
V3 and V4. Participants with more stable WM performance (i.e., lower
load-dependent increase of the variability parameter) showed stronger
load-related activation increase in left superior intraparietal sulcus (sIPS),
suggesting that sIPS involvement helps to stabilize WM representations
in the face of higher load. WM contents could be decoded from activity
patterns in visual and parietal regions using multivariate pattern classification. Here, decreasing classifier accuracy under higher load in sIPS was
identified as neural correlate of reduced precision and higher variability
(but not guess rate) under increased load. We suggest that the quality of
WM representations depends on representational precision in sIPS while
the same region controls the stability with which such representations can
be kept active under WM demands.

F50
MAINTENANCE OF NON-CONSCIOUSLY PERCEIVED INFORMATION ENGAGES TASK- AND STIMULUS-RELATED CORTICAL
REGIONS Fredrik Bergström1,2, Lars Nyberg1,2, Greger Orädd1,2, Johan Eriksson1,2; 1Umeå center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), 2Umeå University —
Working memory is traditionally assumed to only operate on conscious
information. However, recent findings have shown that non-consciously
perceived information can be maintained for up to 15 s, despite irrelevant
distracters, while engaging the prefrontal cortex. Here we used continuous
flash suppression (CFS) to non-consciously present stimuli, and a delayed
match-to-sample task (DMS) to investigate non-conscious working memory.
Specifically, maintenance of combined spatial and object information was
required to solve the task successfully. In two behavioral experiments, DMS
performance for unseen stimuli was above chance level after a 5 s delay.
During functional magnetic resonance imaging, DMS performance was at
chance level across the whole group (n=27) after a variable 5-15 s delay. For
participants with a positive d’ (n=13), BOLD signal changes in prefrontal,
parietal, and temporal regions were specifically associated with the delay
period. BOLD amplitude in prefrontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital
regions correlated with individual DMS d’ scores for the sub-group with
positive d’. Thus, for individuals with successful non-conscious retention,
task- and stimulus-related regions were engaged and could predict task
performance. We therefore conclude that non-consciously perceived information can be maintained during a working memory task.

F51
THE ROLE OF THE INTRAPARIETAL SULCUS IN SETTING CAPACITY LIMITS IN VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Amanda van Lamsweerde1,2,
Jeffrey S. Johnson1,2; 1North Dakota State University, 2Center for Visual and Cognitive Neuroscience — Several lines of evidence suggest a role for the intra-

parietal sulcus (IPS) in the storage capacity of working memory (WM).
For example, IPS activity has been found to increase with memory load,
with the extent of the increase predicting individual differences in capacity
(Todd & Marois, 2004, 2005). Other research, however, has revealed that
the IPS is insensitive to the complexity of the stored information (Xu, 2006),
prompting the proposal that the IPS may contribute to capacity by indexing
the locations of a fixed number of objects, rather than storing WM representations. To test this hypothesis, continuous theta burst TMS (cTBS) was
applied to either the IPS or a control area prior to the performance of a
color recall WM task, and cTBS-related changes in the capacity and precision of WM representations, and the likelihood of mis-binding objects to
locations (swap errors), were analyzed. If the IPS indexes a fixed number of
locations, rather than representing item information, cTBS should influence

186

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
the capacity of WM, but not the quality of the representations (precision).
Supporting this possibility IPS stimulation decreased capacity, but had
no effect on either precision or swap errors. Preliminary analysis of data
from a follow-up experiment (n=7), revealed decreased capacity and swap
errors, but no change in precision, when arrhythmic trains of high-frequency rTMS were applied to the IPS during the maintenance, but not the
encoding, phase of the recall task. This suggests that the IPS contributes to
WM capacity, but likely does not directly represent stimulus information.

F52
EPISODIC MEMORY INTERFERES WITH HIGH-RESOLUTION
VISUAL WORKING MEMORY Matthew Sazma1, Andy Yonelinas1; 1UC Davis
— In a model proposed by Yonelinas (2013), the hippocampus is involved
not only in long-term memory, but also in complex high-resolution bindings in working memory and perception. In order to test this model, participants performed a high-resolution working memory task while being
distracted. Three colored squares flashed for 400ms, then during the two
second retention interval, one of two distractors was given: either a semantic compound word judgment (do these two words form a compound word
or not), or an episodic memory judgment (participants had to identify if
word pairs studied at the beginning of the experiment were intact or rearranged). Participants then had to select the precise color of a square using
a graded high-resolution color wheel. Performance on the two distractor
tasks was matched in a pilot study for both accuracy and reaction time.
Results show when the distractor was the episodic judgment, performance
is worse for the memory judgment, and worse for selecting the precise
color from the color wheel. This mutual interference when hippocampal
resources were used during the retention interval (episodic memory judgment) compared to an equally difficult semantic compound word judgment supports the idea that there is hippocampal involvement in complex
high-resolution visual working memory.

F53
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN MATERIAL-SPECIFIC ENCODING.
Katherine L Alfred1, Rachel G Pizzie1, Daniel S Harris1, David J M Kraemer1; 1Dartmouth College — Neuroimaging investigations generally pool variance on

the group level, treating individual differences as unaccountable noise.
This approach eschews the potentially important detail that each participant contributes unique variance to any group analysis due to idiosyncratic
cognitive functioning. Indeed, several studies (Hsu et al., 2011; Kraemer et
al., 2009; Miller et al., 2002; 2011) have demonstrated that measurable individual differences (e.g., encoding strategies) account for significant variance that is not explained by task manipulations alone. Here we extend this
research by comparing the separate influences of individual differences in
verbal and visual modalities, including intelligence, working memory, cognitive styles, and encoding strategies. Using an intentional encoding task
during fMRI scanning, we manipulated stimuli in a 2[modality: words,
images] x 2[semantic relevance: meaningful, nonsense] design, to obtain two
separate measures of task performance: stimulus repeat detection during
encoding, and subsequent recognition memory. Results demonstrate that
some individual difference measures exhibit different correlations with
neural versus with behavioral measures. For example, in a functionally-defined verbal region-of-interest (words>images), a positive correlation was
observed between verbal cognitive style and relative activity during meaningful images > non-meaningful images. This is consistent with the hypothesis that these individuals have a tendency to activate verbal labels when
available. However, verbal cognitive style predicted verbal - but not visual
- recognition performance. The overall pattern of results reveals interacting
influences of these individual differences by examining their relative effects
across semantic versus perceptual processes, verbal versus visual modalities, and behavioral versus neural levels of analysis.

F54
INFLUENCE OF COLOUR AND LUMINANCE ON VISUAL WORKING MEMORY - A STUDY USING EEG. Maciej Kosilo1, Jasna Martinovic2,
Corinna Haenschel1; 1City University London, 2University of Aberdeen — Early

encoding processes in working memory (WM) have been shown to have
significant impact on performance (Haenschel et al., 2007). Although current reports point to the interplay between perception and WM (Pasternak & Greenle, 2005), the role of perceptual factors in WM is not clear.

2015 Annual Meeting
Separate visual channels process chromatic and achromatic (luminance)
information. In line with accounts of everyday vision benefitting from fast
luminance projections transmitted through magnocellular pathway (Bar,
2003), we expected that luminance will benefit performance on WM task
more than chromatic information. In a delayed discrimination task participants had to remember up to 3 abstract shapes. The stimuli were defined
along different directions in cardinal colour space (Derrington et al., 1984),
creating luminance-defined stimuli, two classes of chromatic-only stimuli,
and a mixed-signals stimuli. The stimuli were equated in terms of salience
through an initial psychophysical same/different threshold task. Luminance-defined shapes led to higher accuracy and faster reaction times.
Event-related potentials time locked to the last item in encoding array
revealed that early visual component P1 was characterised by a greater
amplitude in response to luminance stimuli. Component N1 peaked at
parietal and frontal sites earlier for luminance-defined stimuli, reflecting
the luminance speed advantage. The results point to the differential contribution of different cone signals to WM performance, highlighting the
importance of early encoding in these tasks. In line with previous studies
(Kveraga et al., 2007) we hypothesise that fast luminance projections may
serve as an early trigger for top-down processing, affecting the efficiency
of WM encoding.

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
F55
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS REVEALED EARLY (150 MS) RHYMING EFFECTS FOR SINGLE LETTERS Sewon Bann1, Anthony Herdman1;
1
University of British Columbia — Previous event related potential (ERP) studies using rhyme-related letter or word stimuli have reported a rhyme effect
in which nonrhyming stimuli elicit a larger negativity at 450 ms (i.e. N450)
than rhyming stimuli. This N450 effect has been attributed to phonological
processing; however, previous ERP studies suggest that basic phonological processing can begin as early as 150ms. This study provides support
for this claim. We investigated whether ERPs could detect early (<300 ms)
phonological processing using three different paradigms: a letter rhyming paradigm (letter names rhyme with the sound /i/, e.g. “D”, “T”), a
paired-stimulus rhyming paradigm (first letter name rhymes with second
letter name), and a letter/pseudoletter detection paradigm. ERPs from the
two rhyming paradigms revealed an early rhyme effect around 150 ms
(i.e. N150) along with the later expected N450 rhyme effect. These results,
along with consideration of known models of word reading and recognition, led us to suggest that the N150 rhyme effect might be the beginning
of phonological retrieval. Therefore, the N450 rhyme effect is most likely
associated with subsequent phonological awareness. We also found that
pseudoletters evoked a larger and more delayed N170, which has been
previously suggested to reflect orthographic processing. However, given
that our results showed a rhyme effect as early as 150 ms, this N170 letter
vs. pseudoletter effect might reflect phonological processing in addition
to orthographic processing. These results indicate that existing models of
letter and word recognition might need adjustments with regards to the
timing of orthographic and phonological processing.

F56
PROCESSING SPECIFIC TO LETTER STRINGS AND LETTERS
UNDER A RESTRICTION ON THE AVAILABILITY OF ATTENTION
BY THE PRESENTATION RATE OF LETTER STRINGS IN JAPANESE
HIRAGANA Tomoki Uno1, Yasuko Okumura1,2, Tetsuko Kasai3; 1Graduate
School of Education, Hokkaido University, 2Department of Developmental Disorders, National Institute of Mental Health, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 3Faculty of Education, Hokkaido University — Extensive experience in
reading develops specialized neural activities for letter string perception,
which is reflected in N170 component of event-related potentials (ERPs).
To examine the automaticity of print-tuned processing in Japanese Hiragana, we previously examined ERPs in response to letter and non-letter
stimuli when linguistic processing was restricted by rapid stimulus presentation (100 ms duration with 300-600 ms interstimulus interval) and the
task that leads attention away from stimuli themselves (discrimination of
fixation color), and we observed bilateral N170 for letter strings without
typical left lateralization (Okumura et al., 2014, NeuroReport). The present

Poster Session F
study examined whether the bilateral N170 was due to the difference in
proportion of letter- to non-letter stimuli within experimental blocks (i.e.,
2:1). ERPs were recorded from 11 native Japanese speakers under the same
experimental conditions as those in Okumura et al. (2014), except that each
block contained two types of equiprobable stimuli out of three (words, nonwords, and symbols). As a result, during 150-200 ms poststimulus, words
and nonwords elicited left-lateralized N170 at occipito-temporal scalp sites,
along with a greater negative enhancement for nonwords against words
at parietal sites. The results suggest that the number of stimulus types
that constitute a sequence affects the amount of attention allocated to two
task-irrelevant processes: phonological processing in terms of letter strings
and processing specific to individual letters in transparent language.

F57
INFERENTIAL PROCESSING IN NATURAL READING: A FIXATION-RELATED POTENTIALS (FRPS) STUDY Jonas Diekmann1, Dietmar Roehm1; 1University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria — This Fixation-related

potential (FRP) study investigated the online processing of inferences in
natural reading by means of co-registering subject’s eye-movements and
electrophysiological activity. It previously has been shown that the processing of varyingly strong inferential relationships elicits a centro-parietal negativity (N400) and a posterior positivity (P600). In addition, recent
eye-movement (EM) studies reported that the parameters fixation duration
and gaze duration are sensitive to inferential processing. Here, we extend
previous work by the manipulation of inferable entities’ discourse prominence. Two diverging context types were utilized in which the inferable
entity was either acting as agent or instrument within the preceding context. With respect to the participant’s EMs we found increased total reading
times for discourses including difficult inferences. In contrast, the context
manipulation led to reduced total reading times and amount of fixations
for inferable entities acting as an agent in comparison to an instrument.
With respect to the electrophysiological measurements FRPs related to
the first fixation on a critical noun revealed a N400 effect for more difficult
inferences versus less difficult inferences which was distributed over anterior-left and –right electrode sites. Additionally, the inferential processing
of entities associated with the thematic role of an instrument elicited a posterior distributed P600 effect in comparison to the inferential processing of
entities acting as an agent. Furthermore, our results suggest that inferential
processing in natural reading might be executed in a delayed manner as
compared to a rapid serial visual paradigm (RSVP).

F58
INTRA- AND INTER-HEMISPHERIC WORD PROCESSING IN
YOUNG ADULTS WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER Kareem
Al-Khalil1, Michael O’Boyle1, Adam Brewer2, NaHe Jeon3; 1Texas Tech University,
Florida Institute of Technology, 3Stanford University — Weak Coherence Theory

2

suggests that hypo-connectivity between brain regions may underlie several of the cognitive deficits observed in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD,
Happe & Frith, 2006). And, some current research has reported decreased
inter-hemispheric connectivity in those with ASD (Anderson et al., 2011).
Visual-half field experiments provide a useful methodology to assess
intra-hemispheric functioning, as well as evaluating inter-hemispheric
communication. In the present study, 11 ASD (6 males, 5 females, 18-23
years) and 18 neuro-typical (NT; 8 males,10 females, 18-23 years) made
same/different judgments about word pairs flashed briefly to the left visual-field/right hemisphere (LVF-RH), the right visual-field/left hemisphere
(RVF-LH), or one word presented simultaneously to each visual field
(Cross Hemisphere). In the latter, participants must exchange information
between the hemispheres to successfully perform the task. The ASD committed significantly more errors than NT participants regardless of visual
field of presentation. And, the ASD produced significantly longer reaction
times (RT) than the NT when processing word pairs presented in each of
the three visual-fields, with the differences between groups being most pronounced for LVF-RH and Cross Hemisphere trials. This pattern suggests
a deficit in inter-hemispheric transfer of information in those with ASD.
Possible explanations for the obtained deficit include particularly impaired
word processing by the right hemisphere in the ASD (e.g., insufficient
encoding) and/or inefficient transfer of information between the hemispheres via the Corpus Callosum.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

187

Poster Session F

2015 Annual Meeting

F59
NEURAL CHANGES UNDERLYING SUCCESSFUL SECOND LANGUAGE WORD LEARNING: AN FMRI STUDY Jing Yang1, Kathleen
Gates2, Peter Molenaar2, Ping Li3; 1Bilingual Cognition and Education Lab, and
National Key Research Center for Linguistics and Applied Linguistics, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China, 2Department of Human
Development and Family Studies, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA, USA, 3Center for Brain, Behavior, and Cognition and Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA — A great deal of
research has examined behavioral performance changes associated with
second language learning. But what changes are taking place in the brain as
learning progresses? How can we identify differences in brain changes that
reflect successes of learning? To answer these questions, we conducted a
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study to examine the neural
activities associated with second language word learning. Participants
were 39 native English speakers without prior knowledge of Chinese or
other tonal language, and were trained to learn a novel tonal vocabulary
in a six-week training session. Functional MRI scans as well as behavioral
performances were obtained from these learners at two different times. We
performed region of interest (ROI) and connectivity analyses to identify
effective connectivity changes associated with success in second language
word learning. We compared a learner group with a control group, and
also examined the differences between successful learners and less successful learners across the two time points. Our results indicated that (1)
after training, learners and non-learners rely on different patterns of brain
networks to process tonal and lexical information of target L2 words; (2)
within the learner group, successful learners compared to less successful
learners showed significant differences in language-related regions; and
(3) successful learners compared to less successful learners showed a more
coherent and integrated multi-path brain network. These results suggest
that second language experience shapes neural changes in short-term training, and that analyses of these neural changes also reflect individual differences in learning success.

F60
SPATIO-TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF THE LEXICAL SELECTION
NETWORK IN SPEECH PRODUCTION: INSIGHTS FROM ELECTROCORTICOGRAPHY Stephanie Ries1, Rummit Dhillon1, Alex Clarke2, Kenneth
3,4

3

5

4,5

6

Laxer , Peter Weber , Rachel Kuperman , Kurtis Auguste , Gerwin Schalk ,
Josef Parvizi7, Nathan Crone8, Nina Dronkers9, Robert Knight1; 1University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA., 2Centre for Speech, Language and the Brain, Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, 3California Pacific
Medical Center, 4University of California San Francisco, 5Children’s Hospital
and Research Center, Oakland, CA, 6New York State Department of Health, Wadsworth Center, and Department of Neurology, Albany Medical College, 7Stanford
Human Intracranial Cognitive Electrophysiology Program (SHICEP), Stanford University, 8Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 9VA Northern California Health Care System and University of California,
Davis. — Lexical selection is the process of selecting the words necessary
for language production. Different regions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and of the left temporal cortex (LTC) are associated with lexical selection
but their role and how they interact remain underspecified. We recorded
electrocorticography (ECoG) in 8 neurosurgical patients to examine where
and when subregions of the PFC and the LTC were engaged in lexical
selection (6 with left, 2 with right hemisphere coverage, spanning the areas
of interest). Patients performed picture naming wherein semantic context
was manipulated to affect lexical selection difficulty: pictures of objects
were presented within semantically-homogeneous (difficult) or heterogeneous blocks (easy). Subjects’ performance was worse in homogeneous vs.
heterogeneous blocks. High-gamma (HG) activity, indexing cortical activation magnitude, was sensitive to semantic interference at several cortical sites (greater in homogeneous vs. heterogenous blocks). Early effects
were seen in HG activity starting between 180 and 260 ms post-stimulus
at posterior inferior LTC sites. Subsequent left PFC effects were observed
at middle (starting around 310 ms post-stimulus) and inferior frontal
sites (around vocal-onset). Response-locked effects were also observed at

188

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

superior and middle LTC sites. Finally, across trials, HG power co-varied
between involved left PFC and LTC recording sites. Our results suggest
that posterior inferior LTC engages in lexical access as semantic concepts
become available. Left PFC activity may provide top-down control over
LTC regions to help solve competition between semantically-related alternatives trial-by-trial. Finally, response-locked LTC activity may reflect a
speech monitoring mechanism sensitive to lexical selection difficulty.

F61
THE LEFT POSTERIOR VENTRAL OCCIPITOTEMPORAL CORTEX
IS INVOLVED IN (LEXICAL) ORTHOGRAPHIC BUT NOT SEMANTIC PROCESSING OF AUDITORY WORDS Philipp Ludersdorfer1, Martin
Kronbichler1,2, Heinz Wimmer1; 1University of Salzburg, 2Paracelsus Medical
University Salzburg — Dual-route theories of reading have posited the exis-

tence of a neuronal representation coding for whole written words (i.e.,
an orthographic lexicon). However, neuroimaging evidence for such a
representation is sparse since it has proved difficult to disentangle lexical orthographic from semantic processes in reading. The present fMRI
study tried to accomplish this by contrasting orthographic and semantic
processing of auditory words. Twenty-nine participants performed three
tasks in the scanner. In the orthographic task participants had to decide
whether the spelling of an auditorily presented word consisted of three
or four letters. Lexical orthographic processing was assured by an opaque
phoneme-grapheme relation. While all words consisted of three phonemes, they could either have three or four letters. Thus, sublexical processing (i.e., serial phoneme-grapheme conversions) was discouraged. The
orthographic task was compared to a semantic task in which participants
were presented with the same auditory words but had to decide whether
the words referred to a living or nonliving entity. An additional auditory
control task presented pure tones and participants had to evaluate their
pitch. We observed more activation for the orthographic compared to the
semantic task only in a single cluster located in left posterior ventral occipitemporal cortex (LpvOT). Additionally, LpvOT activation for the semantic
task did not differ from the auditory control task. These results suggest
that LpvOT is involved in lexical orthographic but not semantic processing.
This is in line with the hypothesis that LpvOT may be the neuronal equivalent of the cognitive orthographic lexicon.

LANGUAGE: Other
F62
EFFECT OF AGE OF ACQUISITION ON VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION; AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL MEASURE IN PERSIAN
ORTHOGRAPHY Mehdi Bakhtiar1, Hyun Kyung Lee1, I-fan Su1, Brendan
Weekes1; 1Laboratory for Communication Science, The University of Hong Kong —
Detecting an effect of age of acquisition (AoA) in expert visual word recognition is a controversial issue. One issue is whether AoA has a truly unique
effect in word naming and another concern is whether this effect is lexical,
semantic or phonological in nature. In this study the unique nature of AoA
in visual word recognition across different words in Persian were inspected
using an ERP experiment. 23 native Persian speakers were asked to perform lexical decision with 120 early-acquired and late-acquired transparent
and opaque words whilst controlling word frequency. The ERP analysis
revealed a significantly greater N400 negativity for the late versus early-acquired words across the central electrodes i.e. FZ, CZ and PZ (p < .01).
Moreover, there was greater N170 negativity for early versus late acquired
words (PO5-PO8) but the difference was significant in the right hemispheric
i.e. PO6 and PO8 electrodes (p < .05) only. Finding greater N400 negativity
(i.e. greater lexical-semantic retrieval) from the long-term memory store for
late acquired words compared to early words is in agreement with semantic accounts of the AoA effect. A greater negativity of N170 component for
early versus late acquired words especially in the right parietal-occipital
hemisphere indicates more efficient orthographical processing for words
learnt earlier in life. Finding more efficient orthographic and semantic
processing for early versus late words is also consistent with the neural
plasticity hypothesis indicating that early learning can take advantage of
a more flexible neural system and may induce multiple neural representations in the brain.

2015 Annual Meeting

F63
THE BEAT GOES ON: THE EFFECT OF RHYTHM ON READING Layla
Gould1, Eric Lorentz1, Chelsea Ekstrand1, Marla Mickleborough1, Ron Borowsky;
University of Saskatchewan — Speech and music involve organized acoustic

1

sequences and complex cognitive and motor processes. Although speech
does not possess the same degree of temporal regularity as music, there is
recent evidence to suggest that temporal regularity (i.e., a beat) enhances
speech processing (Cason & Schön, 2012). Furthermore, phonetic decoding activates the putamen (Oberhuber et al., 2013), which is a key region
involved in rhythm processing (e.g., Grahn, 2009). The aim of this experiment was to explore the connection between reading and rhythm processing by examining whether reading is affected by the presentation of
a rhythmic prime (loud-soft or soft-loud) that was either ‘on-beat’ or ‘offbeat’ with the syllabic stress of the bisyllabic target letter string. We developed a novel paradigm using targets that place the stress on either the
first or second syllable (practice vs. police), as well as their corresponding
pseudohomophones (praktis vs. polees). We predicted that naming reaction times would be faster when the rhythmic prime was ‘on-beat’ with the
syllabic stress, and slower when the rhythmic prime was ‘off-beat’. Furthermore, we predicted that the pseudohomophones would show a larger
effect given that they must be phonetically decoded. The results supported
these hypotheses, and suggest that a rhythmic prime matched to the syllabic stress of a letter string can enhance reading processes. This study
also guided our development of a functional magnetic resonance imaging
study to identify the brain networks that underlie the cross-domain effect
of rhythm on speech, and our exploration of the putamen’s involvement in
phonetic decoding.

F64
HEMISPHERIC DOMINANCE FOR LANGUAGE IN PRIMARY PROGRESSIVE APHASIA Megan Thompson1,2, Zachary A. Miller1, Leighton B.
Hinkley1, Danielle Mizuiri1, Maya Henry1, Maria Luisa Mandelli1, Miranda Babiak1,
Gil Rabinovici1, Howard Rosen1, Bruce L. Miller1, Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini1,
Srikantan S. Nagarajan1; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University
of California, Berkeley — Primary progressive aphasias (PPA), specifically

semantic variant (svPPA), are asymmetric language neurodegenerative
conditions typically affecting the left side with increased rates of non-right
handedness. Previous cases of left-handed svPPA individuals with rightsided atrophy have illustrated atypical language lateralization, raising the
possibility that disease vulnerability associates with language dominance.
Here, we use magnetoencephalographic (MEG) imaging to describe the lateralization of functional language activity in PPA. MEG data was collected
from both healthy controls and PPA patients during an auditory noun-verb
generation task using a 275-channel biomagnetometer (CTF). Data was
reconstructed in source space using an adaptive spatial filtering technique
in Nutmeg (bil.ucsf.edu/nutmeg). In the healthy controls, changes in beta
(12-30Hz) power were largely confined to frontal, temporal and parietal
regions of the left hemisphere, with only 5% of individuals showing right
hemisphere dominance for language. In contrast, 29% of svPPA patients
were clearly right hemisphere dominant. In a group contrast between control and svPPA groups, robust differences in beta suppression were only
significant (p<0.001) for right frontal regions, with increased suppression
over the middle frontal and pre-central gyri in svPPA patients. Atypical
language lateralization is more common in non-right handed individuals
than right-handed individuals. In the context of prior findings of increased
non-right-handedness in svPPA, these imaging data are more consistent
with a theory of anomalous language lateralization as a risk factor associated with development of svPPA rather than svPPA being directly associated with language dominance.

F65
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY RESPONSES TO WITHIN-CATEGORY
CHANGES IN THE SWEDISH VOWEL /I/ Ellen Marklund1, Iris-Corinna
Schwarz1, Francisco Lacerda1; 1Stockholm University — The amplitude of
MMN-responses to non-speech stimuli varies with the degree of acoustic difference between the standard stimulus and the deviant stimulus
[H. Tiitinen, et al., Nature 372, 90-92, (1994)]. When stimuli are speechsounds, the MMN-amplitude also depends on the phonemic categories of
the participant’s language. For example, the same deviant elicits a greater

Poster Session F
MMN-amplitude in listeners if it belongs to a different phonemic category
in their language compared to in listeners in whose language it belongs
to the same category as the standard [R. Näätänen, et al., Nature 385, 432434, (1997)]. Additionally, changes of equivalent spectral difference result
in greater MMN-amplitudes if they cross a phoneme boundary than if they
do not [A. Sharma and M. F. Dorman, Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 106, 1078-1083, (1999)]. However, little is known about how
the MMN-amplitude varies with different kinds of acoustic variations of
speech-sounds within the same phonemic category. The present study
investigates MMN-responses to within-category changes of the Swedish
vowel /i/, varied in terms of fundamental frequency (f0), the first formant
(F1), or the second formant (F2). Twelve right-handed native speakers of
Swedish participated in the study. A first analysis shows that an MMN
response was found in response to the f0-deviants, but not in response to
either the F1-deviants or the F2-deviants. This is attributed to the fact that
variations in f0 are generally more perceptually salient than variations in F1
or F2, especially in within a single speech-sound category.

F66
CHANGES TO NEURAL SENSITIVITY BEFORE AND AFTER OVERNIGHT CONSOLIDATION OF PHONETIC TRAINING IS ABSENT IN
ADULTS WITH LANGUAGE-BASED DISORDERS F. Sayako Earle1,
Emily B. Myers1,2, Nina Gumkowski2, Nicole Landi1,2; 1University of Connecticut,
2
Haskins Laboratories — Phonological instability is observed in individuals

with language-based disorders (primary language impairment and/or dyslexia [LI]; Snowling, 1998; Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1998). Memory encoding
during sleep is thought to be critical in building phonological categories
(Earle & Myers, 2014); for example, sleep has been observed to facilitate
improved discrimination (Earle & Myers, 2013) and generalization of identification to unfamiliar talkers (Earle & Myers, under review), following
training on a nonnative contrast. However, individuals with LI have atypical sleep patterns (e.g. O’Bruni et al., 2009); therefore, overnight consolidation of phonetic information may be compromised. To test this, we trained
adults with and without LI to identify nonnative (dental-retroflex) speech
sounds at 8PM on day 1, and assessed their discrimination performance
immediately before and after training, and again at 8AM on the following
day (day 2). We obtained mismatch negativity (MMN) responses to the nonnative contrasts, before training on day 1 and after retest on day 2, as neural
correlates to the changes observed in behavior. Groups demonstrated
comparable learning during training. In typical adults, we replicated the
finding (Earle & Myers, 2013) that discrimination performance improved
overnight. Consistent with our behavioral measure, the amplitude of the
MMN response in typical adults was significantly higher on day 2 than day
1. In contrast, adults with LI did not improve in performance across the
overnight interval; furthermore, there was no significant difference in their
MMN response between sessions. Results suggest that the role of sleep in
encoding novel phonetic information differs in language impairment.

F67
NEURAL CORRELATES OF ORTHOGRAPHIC CONSISTENCY IN
READERS WITH AND WITHOUT DYSLEXIA Myriam Oliver1, Pedro M.
Paz-Alonso1, Ileana Quiñones1, Cesar Caballero1, Maria P. Suarez-Coalla2, Jon
A. Duñabeitia1, Fernando Cuetos2, Manuel Carrerias1,3,4; 1Basque Center on
Cognition, Brain and Language, (BCBL) Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain, 2Departamento de Psicología, Universidad de Oviedo, Spain, 3IKERBASQUE, Basque
Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain, 4Departmento de Lengua Vasca y Comunicación, UPV/EHU, Bilbao, Spain — Readers with dyslexia exhibit less stable

orthography-phonology mappings. Reading in transparent orthographies
relies more on small grain size linguistic units (grapheme-phoneme). Thus,
variations in orthographic consistency of small-unit patterns may compromise phonological decoding in transparent orthographies and present an
additional difficulty for dyslexic readers. The present fMRI study aimed
at investigating the neural correlates of orthographic consistency in Spanish readers with dyslexia (21) and matched controls (20) using a naming
task. At the scanner participants had to name four different types of stimuli:
1) consistent words (words, porteria); 2) inconsistent words (words with
specific pronunciation rules, ingeniero); 3) non-words/pseudowords (cinguda); and, 4) homophones (non-words derived from misspells in words
with specific pronunciation rules, ajencia). Regional patterns of activation

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

189

Poster Session F
in left perisylvian regions, including inferior frontal gyrus and superior
parietal lobe, showed group by condition interactions. Controls, but not
dyslexics, recruited more strongly these areas for pseudowords and homophones relative to words. Group effects were observed across conditions in
the middle temporal gyrus and ventral occipital-temporal cortex, with dyslexic readers showing hipoactivation in these regions relative to controls.
Also, phonological fluency was predicted by pars opercularis activation in
controls and by pars triangularis in dyslexics, suggesting higher reliance
on semantic regions to solve phonologic processes in dyslexic readers. Our
results revealed a less refined neural patterns of orthographic consistency
and phonology in dyslexic readers, which may determine their reading difficulties.

F68
EVIDENCE FOR THE DUAL ROUTE MODEL OF LANGUAGE PROCESSING USING DYNAMIC CAUSAL MODELING Marcela Perrone-Bertolotti1, Cédric Pichat2, Louise Kauffmann3, Juan R Vidal4, Monica
Baciu5; 1CNRS, LPNC UMR 5105, F-38040 Grenoble, 2CNRS, LPNC UMR 5105,
F-38040 Grenoble, 3CNRS, LPNC UMR 5105, F-38040 Grenoble, 4CNRS, LPNC
UMR 5105, F-38040 Grenoble, 5CNRS, LPNC UMR 5105, F-38040 Grenoble —
Functional MRI results suggest that visual word recognition depends on a
dual-route model including a dorsal grapho-phonological (dGP) and a ventral lexico-semantic (vLS) stream. Here, we combined fMRI and dynamic
causal modeling (DCM) analysis to investigate word and pseudo-word
processing according to the dual-route model. Based on the group-level
analysis, we first defined five ROIs (vOT, STG, SMA, dIFG and vIFG) and
specified nine alternative models with equivalent level of complexity, similar endogenous connectivity between the ROIs and two modulated streams
(ventral modulation by dGP and dorsal modulation by vLS). Both pathways started with vOT and ended with vIFG. We used DCM12 to estimate
how experimental conditions (dGP, vLS) influenced connectivity between
ROIs. Bayesian model selection was applied to define the most plausible
Family (F) of models grouped according to the connections modulated by
dGP and vLS. Results indicated that the Model 6 (Figure 1) was the most
plausible for processing words and pseudo-words. Furthermore, F analysis for dGP stream indicated that F1 (modulation of vOT==> SMA ==>
dIFG ==> vIFG connectivity) and F2 (modulation of vOT==> STG ==>
SMA ==> dIFG ==> vIFG connectivity) were the most plausible to explain
pseudo-word processing. F analysis for the vLS stream indicated that F3
(including two co-existent sub-streams, with modulation of vVOT ==>
vIFG and vOT==>STG ==> vIFG connectivity). Overall, these results are in
agreement with the dual route model of word recognition, suggesting that
the two pathways, one dorsal and another one ventral can be selectively
recruited according to lexical properties.

LANGUAGE: Semantic
F69
MEASURING INCIDENTAL WORD LEARNING IN FIRST AND
SECOND LANGUAGES USING ERPS Ben Seipel1; 1California State University, Chico — The objective of this study was to examine the behavioral

and neurocognitive (ERPs) differences in reading known words, recently
learned words, and incidentally learned words for native and non-native
English speakers. Twenty-nine native English speakers (21 females, mean
age = 19.44 years) and 43 English Language Learners (30 females, mean age
= 21.49 years, mean number of year of speaking English = 9.4 years, sd = 5.4
years) participated in the study. Students completed six tasks in this order:
common English word pretest, rare English word pretest, Gates-MacGinitie
Reading Test (modified 12th grade edition), 20 min. rare word study period,
EEG data collection while reading, and posttest of the rare words. During
EEG data collection, students were instructed to read for comprehension.
Although behavioral gain scores indicated that native and non-English
speakers do not differ in their ability to explicitly learn new vocabulary (F=
.79, p = .38) , the two groups did differ in their ability to incidentally learn
new vocabulary from context (F = 7.56, p < .01). In addition, neurocognitive data indicated that ERPs indicated that native and non-native English
speakers process incidentally learned words differently. Specifically, on
only words learned incidentally, native English speakers exhibit greater
central negativity (Cz) 400 ms after stimulus onset (F= 4.58, p =.04), and

190

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
greater right parietal negatively (P4) 400 ms after stimulus onset (F = 5.98, p
= .02) than do non-native English speakers. Conversely, non-native English
speakers exhibit greater negativity in the occipital lobe at the same time.

F70
INVESTIGATING PRAGMATIC CONSTRAINTS IN COUNTERFACTUAL ANTECEDENTS: EVIDENCE FROM THE N400 Eugenia Kulakova1, Mante Nieuwland2; 1University of Salzburg, 2University of Edinburgh —
Counterfactual antecedents (e.g. “If words were made out of sugar, …”)
express states which are factually false but which are treated as true for the
sake of the argument ( “… then letters would taste sweet.”). Counterfactuality is marked by subjunctive mood which pragmatically signals that the
speaker is deliberately saying something false. On the other hand, a factually true statement embedded in a subjunctive antecedent (e.g. “If sweets
were made out of sugar, …”) constitutes a pragmatic violation. The present
EEG/ERP study investigated the effects of pragmatic constraints regarding
the truth-value of counterfactual antecedents on N400 amplitude. The N400
indexes semantic processing costs and is sensitive to contextual fit. Thirty
participants read conditional sentences presented in rapid serial presentation. In a 2 x 2 design we manipulated phrasing (counterfactual vs. indicative) and propositional truth-value (false vs. true) of the antecedents: Counterfactual-false (“If words were made out of sugar”), indicative-false (“If
words are made out of sugar”), counterfactual-true (“If sweets were made
out of sugar”), indicative-true (“If sweets are made out of sugar”). Our
results show higher N400 amplitude for false compared to true propositions at the critical word (‘sugar’). Furthermore, despite identical semantic
association (sweets – sugar) counterfactual-true antecedents showed higher
N400 amplitude compared to indicative-true antecedents. In contrast, N400
amplitude did not differ between both false conditions. These results speak
for an immediate impact of pragmatic constraints during the processing
of counterfactual antecedents. Participants experience true counterfactual
antecedents as contextually inappropriate.

F71
DESCRIBING AND GESTURING CAUSAL EVENTS: EVIDENCE
FROM FOCAL BRAIN-INJURED PATIENTS Demet Özer1, İdil Bostan1,
Anjan Chatterjee2, Tilbe Göksun1; 1Koç University, 2University of Pennsylvania —
In describing cause-effect relation in events, people use causal verbs (e.g.,
push, pull) and may gesture accordingly. Little is known about the neural
correlates of causal language and their accompanying spontaneous gestures. In a sentence “the man pushes the box with the stick,” pushing is the
casual verb;the stick is the instrument. In this study, we investigated how
focal brain-injured patients describe causal events, involving the components of causal verb and instrument and whether gestures compensate for
impaired verbalization of those components. Patients with left (LHD, n=16)
or right (RHD, n=16) hemisphere damage and elderly controls (n=14) were
asked to describe causal events depicted in 22 video clips (11 of them depict
causal actions with an instrument). The correct use of the verb and the
instrument of the causal action and subjects’ spontaneous iconic gestures
were coded. Patients with LHD were less accurate in using both the verb
(p<.01) and instrument (p<.02) in speech compared to RHD and controls.
There were no differences in the number of iconic gesture use (dynamic
or static)among three groups. Yet, LHD patients as a group were more
likely to use causal language neither in speech nor in gesture compared
to RHD and control (p<.02). Patients with damage to the left superior inferior frontal gyrus and left middle frontal gyrusdid not produce verbs in
either modality (case statistics, Crawford &Gartwaite, 2007). We suggest
that frontal lesions may lead to conceptual deficits of causality that appear
both in speech and gesture.

F72
SEMANTIC FEATURE DISTINCTIVENESS: A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING (FMRI) STUDY. Megan Reilly1, Natalya
Machado1, Sheila Blumstein1,2; 1Brown University, 2Brown Institute for Brain
Science — Recent models of semantic memory propose that the semantic
representation of concepts is based, in part, on a network of features. In
this view, a feature that is distinctive for an object (a zebra has stripes) is
processed differently from a feature that is shared across many objects (a
zebra has four legs). Indeed, dementia patients with damage to the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) have shown selective impairment in the pro-

2015 Annual Meeting
cessing of distinctive features. Nonetheless, the neural basis of processing
differences between distinctive and shared features in healthy adults has
not been tested directly. In an fMRI experiment, participants responded
‘yes’ or ‘no’ by button press to visually presented words paired with either
shared or distinctive features. A region of interest analysis focused on four
bilateral regions proposed to be involved in semantic processing: the ATL,
identified in patient and TMS research (Pobric et al. 2007), and three areas
involved in processing semantic relatedness and feature selection: the inferior frontal gyrus, posterior middle temporal gyrus, and inferior parietal
lobe (IPL) (Whitney et al., 2012). In a preliminary analysis (n=8), only the
left IPL showed a significant difference in activation with greater activation
for shared compared to distinctive feature trials. Although patient research
has suggested that the ATL is involved in distinguishing between shared
and distinctive features, these results suggest that a broader network, at
least including the IPL, is sensitive to feature distinctiveness.

F73
LANGUAGE AND CULTURE DETERMINE ONLINE SEMANTIC
ACCESS Ceri Ellis1, Jan Kuipers2, Guillaume Thierry1, Victoria Lovett3, Oliver
Turnbull1, Manon Jones1; 1Bangor University, 2University of Stirling, 3Swansea
University — Linguistic relativity effects have been found in brain processes

such as colour perception, early object categorization, and motion event
perception. Here, we show that language also modulates higher processing levels, such as access to semantic knowledge. Welsh-English bilinguals
with native-like proficiency in both their languages read sentences containing a premise that they were subsequently asked to rate as true or false,
whilst event related potentials were recorded on the sentence-final word.
Half of the sentences contained information that was culturally relevant
to Wales (In Wales, Snowdon is the highest mountain), whilst the other
half contained information culturally non-specific to these participants
(Everest is the highest mountain). Sentences were presented in Welsh or
English, which was counterbalanced across participants. Analysis of the
N400 time window (340-450ms) yielded a significantly reduced amplitude
for true sentences containing culturally relevant information when it was
presented in Welsh. In other words, Welsh-English speakers were better
able to integrate high-level semantic information (truisms) when the content and the language of presentation were aligned. Crucially, sentences
containing exactly the same information but presented in English did not
show the same level of semantic integration. Our findings show that even
in highly proficient bilinguals, language interacts with factors associated
with personal identity, such as culture, to modulate online semantic access.

F74
ACTION IS THE KEY TO OBSERVE THE CONTINUUM AMONG CONCRETE AND ABSTRACT WORDS Felipe Munoz-Rubke1,2, Karen Kafadar4,
Karin H. James1,2,3; 1Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University, 2Program in
Neuroscience, Indiana University, 3Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana
University, 4Department of Statistics, University of Virginia — Words are often
classified in terms of the degree to which their meaning refers to observable
objects or actions: if this is high, they are classified as concrete; if it is low,
the word is considered to be abstract. This concrete/abstract dichotomy
has been extensively used in both behavioral and fMRI studies. However,
classifying words into these categories fails to take into consideration how
words are originally learned: through direct experience. Furthermore, the
concrete/abstract dichotomy has provided an impoverished account of the
representation of word meaning in the brain. We propose that words fall
along a continuum that refers to our interactions with our environments
and that previously used scales have fostered the concrete/abstract dichotomy. To investigate these hypotheses, we created two scales emphasizing
the sensorimotor experience underlying word meaning - one based on multisensory information and another based on action. Sixty-eight nouns and
verbs were selected and rated by 80 participants on four scales: the wellknown concreteness and imageability scales, and the two new scales. A
word-by-word analysis conducted by means of a median polish – a robust
exploratory technique – showed that both new scales were successful in
identifying a continuum for both nouns and verbs, while both imageability
and concreteness scales strongly dichotomized the nouns, and to a lesser
extent, the verbs. These results suggest that word meaning should be considered in light of how words are initially learned and provide a novel way
to understand meaning.

Poster Session F

F75
DOWNSTREAM PROCESSING CONSEQUENCES OF SENTENTIAL
CONCRETENESS Cybelle Smith1, Kara Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign — Processing advantages for concrete over abstract
language are seen in a variety of behavioral tasks, and differential brain
responses to frequency-matched concrete and abstract words have been
observed using a variety of methods, including Event Related Potentials
(ERPs). In particular, concreteness has been found to modulate the amplitude of the N400 component, indexing semantic access, and to elicit a sustained anterior negativity, which has been linked to mental imagery (e.g.,
West & Holcomb 2000). Whereas concreteness effects are well-documented
for individual words, the question of how concrete versus abstract words
are used to build message-level representations has not been much examined. In the current ERP study (32 subjects), we manipulated the concreteness of sentence-medial nouns, and examined the processing consequences
of this concreteness manipulation both at the target noun and further downstream, where a pronoun referred back to the target. Participants read sentences for comprehension such as: “The beer (concrete) / joke (abstract) did
not go over well, since it didn’t suite the guests’ taste.” N400 concreteness
effects were apparent at the target noun. However, the sustained anterior
negativity was elicited several words later, prior to and including the pronoun. This suggests that under ordinary reading conditions, participants
may engage in mental imagery preferentially to augment message-level
comprehension, such as when establishing co-reference.

F76
WHEN A HIT SOUNDS LIKE A KISS: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL
EXPLORATION OF SEMANTIC PROCESSING IN VISUAL NARRATIVE Mirella Manfredi1, Neil Cohn2, Marta Kutas2; 1University of Milano-Bicocca,
Milan, Italy, 2University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA — We investigated the understanding of language embedded in comics - a type of visual.
In comics, audiovisual information is often presented visually by means of
written onomatopoeia. The onomatopoeia often accompany “action stars,”
a conventionalized star-shaped “flash” that indicates the culmination of
an event. We thus used action stars to introduce different types of written
information from which inferences could be drawn. Specifically, we presented 100 4-6 panel Peanuts comic strips without words to 28 University
students and recorded ERPs to the critical panel which had been replaced
by an action star containing one of four different types of words: (1) an
onomatopoeic word (e.g., pow!) coherent with the context, (2) a descriptive word (e.g., hit!) referring to a hidden action, (2) an anomalous onomatopoeic word (e.g., smooch!) incoherent with the context, and a so-called
“Grawlix” containing a string of symbols (e.g., @$*%?!) that could be construed as a swear word. All but the Grawlix panel elicited a large N400,
larger to Anomalous onomatopoeia and Descriptive words and smallest
to the congruent Onomatopoeic word, presumably because the latter were
easier to interpret; the Grawlix ERP was positive in this window, much
like a physical violation. Post-N400, only the Descriptive panel elicited a
fronto-central late positivity, suggesting continued processing of the word
and its relation to the visual narrative. In sum, the results demonstrate that
lexical information, carrying different event meaning, can be incrementally
incorporated into the representation of a visual narrative by ~ 300 ms.

F77
PROCESSING PRONOMINAL REFERENCE RESOLUTION: AN ERP
STUDY James Monette1, John Drury1; 1Stony Brook University — Previous ERP
studies of anaphor processing have reported sustained anterior negativities (Nrefs) following anaphors in contexts with more than one potential
antecedent (e.g., ‘‘Bruce told Al that HE…”; Nieuwland & Van Berkum
2006). More recently it has become clear that these situations of referential
ambiguity may also give rise to P600-type effects, with the observed pattern
(i.e., Nref, P600, or both) depending on both presence/absence and type
of behavioral task as well as individual differences in working memory
span (Nieuwland & van Berkum 2008; Nieuwland 2014). The present ERP
reading/judgment study examined responses to pronouns in contexts with
2, 1, or 0 available antecedents. Additionally, we divided the cases with
only one available referent [1Ref] based on whether the first or second NP
served as the antecedent. For example: [2Ref] “Mary told Jane that SHE…”
[1Ref-NP1] “Mary told John that SHE…” [1Ref-NP2] “John told Mary that

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

191

Poster Session F
SHE…” [0Ref] “Mike told John that SHE…”. Included also in this study
were a range of violation types targeting, e.g., morpho-syntax (“could
*walks…”) and logical-semantics/pragmatics (“There wasn’t *John in the
room”). Here we discuss only the pronominal reference conditions. Preliminary data (N=8) suggest both Nref and P600 effects for both [2Ref] and
[0Ref] compared to the [1Ref-NP1] cases (consistent with Nieuwland 2014).
Interestingly, the [1Ref-NP2] cases demonstrate the most negative going
effect of the four conditions. We situate these findings in the context of a
discussion of reference resolution, biases that influence it, and our understanding the etiology of Nref and P600-type effects.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
F78
BRAIN RESPONSES FOR EMOTIONAL MEMORY WHEN EMOTIONAL MEMORY IS AT CHANCE Erik A. Wing1, Ilana T. Z. Dew1, Roberto
Cabeza1; 1Duke University — The finding of enhanced memory for emotional
information has been linked to amygdalar contributions during encoding.
Studies of emotional source memory suggest that the amygdala and other
MTL structures are involved in the encoding and retrieval of affective information, even when retrieval cues are neutral, while separate work has found
that the amygdala is sensitive to emotional stimuli that are processed only
subliminally. Such findings raise the possibility that this region might track
successful emotional memory encoding even when memory is at chance.
To explore this question, we conducted an fMRI study in which participants initially studied faces with either angry or happy expressions. At test,
initially-studied faces appeared in a neutral format, along with completely
novel faces. Participants decided whether each face was previously angry,
previously happy, or new. These responses were used to sort repeated stimuli into three conditions: Source Correct (SC, correct emotional expression),
Source Incorrect (SI, incorrect emotional expression) and Miss (M, repeated
faces called “new”). Although memory scores for old items were at chance,
encoding activity in the amygdala/anterior hippocampus increased with
subsequent memory accuracy (SC>SI>M). Furthermore, representational
similarity analyses revealed greater encoding-retrieval similarity in frontal
and MTL regions during successful face memory. These findings indicate
that in cases where little behavioral evidence for explicit memory exists,
neural signatures may still discriminate between correct and incorrect
memory responses. Further exploration in this area may help clarify the
relationship between implicit and explicit measures, and reveal dissociations between brain-related and overt memory responses.

F79
CUED REACTIVATION DURING AWAKE STATE ENHANCES NEXTDAY MEMORY AND IS RELATED TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
IN LEARNING Arielle Tambini1, Alice Berners-Lee2, Lila Davachi3; 1University
of California, Berkeley, 2Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 3New York University
— Long-term memory retention is thought to supported by the reactivation

of neural activity representative of prior experience during post-encoding
states such as sleep and awake rest. Previous work has sought to externally
cue reactivation by presenting stimuli that were elements of prior learned
associations during post-encoding time periods (e.g. Rudoy et al., 2009).
Cueing during sleep has been shown to benefit memory, as compared to
cueing during the awake state while subjects perform an attention-demanding task. Only one prior study, to date, has shown a memory benefit
for awake cueing. Additionally, it is unclear whether memory benefits of
cueing persist into extended time periods, and what potential factors are
related to cueing success. Here, we asked whether cueing during the awake
state while subjects perform an easy, non-vigilant task benefits next-day
memory. To this end, subjects were trained to criterion on object-location
associations. After learning, a subset of these objects was briefly presented
(50ms) while subjects performed an unrelated lexical decision task. A
benefit in next-day memory (decreased spatial error) was found for cued
versus uncued associations. Individual differences in learning were related
to cueing benefits, such that poorer learners benefited most from cueing.
Additionally, we found cueing benefits were inversely related to explicit
knowledge of which objects were cued, suggesting that explicit retrieval
and rehearsal are not driving cueing benefits. These results suggest that

192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
cued reactivation during post-encoding awake restful periods may benefit
memory and that cueing benefits may be related to individual differences
in learning.

F80
HIPPOCAMPAL STRUCTURE IS ASSOCIATED WITH ABILITY TO
REACTIVATE RELATED STIMULI John Walker1,2, Kathy Low2, Nirav Patel2,
Neal Cohen1,2, Gabriele Gratton1,2, Monica Fabiani1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2Beckman Institute, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Previously we had shown that presenting
an item from a studied pair prior to the test display elicits reactivation of
the related cortical representation, that is, cortical activity based on the
retrieval of relational memory (Walker et al., 2014). The ability to relationally reactivate the various processers of a representation in the cortex has
been theorized to be tied to hippocampal function (Eichenbaum & Cohen,
2001). Here, using the event-related optical signal (EROS; a neuroimaging
technique with high spatial and temporal resolution), we investigated the
functional connectivity and the structural properties of the brain and how
they are associated with the ability to reactivate representations in the
cortex. Participants were presented with face-scene pairs to study and were
later tested using yes-no recognition, with a presentation of the scene as a
preview prior to every test display. We found that hippocampal volume is
strongly correlated with the ability to reactive face areas in the left superior
temporal sulcus (STS), and also that white matter health (as measured by
mean FA) in the right hippocampus is correlated with the ability to reactivate, which was predictive of behavioral performance. Finally, we found
a similar relationship between dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (an area that
shows functional connectivity with the STS both immediately prior and following reactivation), FA, and the ability to reactivate. These data demonstrate the association the hippocampus, and to some extent the DLPFC), has
with the ability to reactivate related items in the cortex.

F81
DAMAGE TO THE MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBES IMPAIRS SPATIAL
PRECISION AND SPATIOTEMPORAL BINDING WHILE SPARING
ALLOCENTRIC MEMORY Branden Kolarik1, Alyssa Borders1, Andrew Yonelinas1, Arne Ekstrom1; 1University of California, Davis — Separate lines of research

suggest roles for the human hippocampus in both spatial navigation and
the binding of item and context information in episodic memory. Reconciling these two accounts has proven difficult. Here, we tested a novel model
of hippocampal function termed the perception and binding model (PBM)
(Yonelinas, 2013), which postulates roles for the hippocampus in complex,
high-resolution binding as part of a larger role in both perception and
memory. Using a virtual analogue of the Morris Water Maze (vMWM), we
tested a patient with damage to the medial temporal lobes (MTL) on multiple probe locations over different delay intervals. We analyzed search patterns on probe trials using a sliding window centered on the hidden target
rather than employing spatial quadrants, as done in past work, because
this method might be better poised to reveal deficits in spatial precision.
Analysis of patient search patterns during probe trials revealed a tendency
to search the area of the hidden platform although with less spatial precision than controls. These data suggest that in a patient with MTL damage,
some allocentric spatial memory is spared but the precision of this memory
is reduced relative to controls. Additionally, using a modified version of
our task, we show that memory and precision impairments become more
severe when required to remember more than one location. These second
set of finding suggest deficits in spatiotemporal binding. Together, our
findings suggest a role for the hippocampus in spatial precision and spatiotemporal binding, consistent with the PBM model.

F82
NEURAL DYNAMICS UNDERLYING RETRIEVAL-PRACTICE
EFFECTS Pedro M. Paz-Alonso1, Manuel Carreiras1,2,3; 1BCBL. Basque Center
on Cognition, Brain and Language, 2IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain, 3Departmento de Lengua Vasca y Comunicación, UPV/EHU,
Bilbao, Spain. — Retrieval practice is highly beneficial for long-term memory.
Compared to repeated study, repeated retrieval enhances performance on
tested information and facilitates learning from subsequent encounters
with that information. Despite a deluge of recent behavioral studies exam-

2015 Annual Meeting
ining the retrieval-practice effect and the factors modulating it, there is
limited neuroimaging data examining the neural mechanisms underlying
this effect. Here, we conducted an fMRI study with young adults (N=38)
aimed at investigating the functional dynamics between regions typically
involved in retrieval success, including the medial temporal lobe (MTL),
parietal cortex and prefrontal cortex (PFC), during the retrieval of information encoded 48 hours earlier. Participants studied 100 Swahili-Spanish word pairs (rafiki-friend) under repeated retrieval or repeated study
conditions. Two days after learning these items participants underwent
MRI scanning and performed a final memory test. Behavioral results confirmed long-term memory benefits of repeated retrieval as opposed to
repeated study. Neuroimaging data revealed stronger MTL engagement
for successfully remembered items studied under repeated study versus
repeated retrieval. In contrast, participants exhibited stronger lateral PFC
recruitment for remembered items learned under repeated retrieval versus
repeated study. Functional connectivity analyses for anatomically-defined
hippocampal regions and structures involved in retrieval success revealed
tighter coupling among distributed hippocampal-PFC regions for items
studied under repeated retrieval versus repeated study, as well as stronger
connectivity among hippocampal regions for items studied under repeated
study versus repeated retrieval. Our results suggest that retrieval practice
facilitates the creation of additional routes to trace back information from
long-term memory, making this information less hippocampal dependent.

F83
ATTENTIONAL FOCUS DISSOCIATES FUNCTIONAL BRAIN NETWORKS ENGAGED BY MUSIC-EVOKED AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
MEMORIES Benjamin Kubit1, Petr Janata1; 1University of California, Davis —
Neuroimaging studies on autobiographical (AB) memory retrieval have
implicated a heterogeneous mix of cortical brain regions encompassing
parietal, prefrontal, and default mode network (DMN) regions. Studies
on top-down attention have demonstrated negative correlations between
DMN and the same parietal and prefrontal regions. The relationships
between these regions during memory retrieval remain unclear, in part,
due to limitations inherent in traditional memory paradigms. We used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare brain networks
engaged by autobiographically salient music as a function of attentional
focus. Before each song, participants were instructed to either attend memories by focusing on the retrieval and content of memories associated with
the song, or to attend music by focusing on the structure of the music,
ignoring any music-evoked memories. The strength of memory recollection, vividness of mental imagery, and familiarity ratings was higher for
AB trials. In addition, during attend-memory trials, AB memories were
rated as having greater strength and vividness compared to memories
during attend music trials. fMRI results indicate that attending to song
structure was associated with activity in parietal and lateral prefrontal
regions while focusing on the music-evoked memory was associated with
activity in DMN and lateral prefrontal regions. Both attention conditions
activated the medial temporal lobe, whereas DMN and parietal regions
demonstrated negatively correlated time-series across conditions. This dissociation between functional networks suggests that both retrieval-related
activity and phenomenological dimensions associated with a memory vary
according to attentional focus.

F84
ALPHA, BUT NOT THETA, OSCILLATIONS COVARY WITH INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN RECOGNITION-MEMORY Yvonne Chen1, Jeremy
B Caplan1; 1University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada — Desynchroniza-

tion of alpha (8-12 Hz) and synchronization of theta (4-8 Hz) oscillations
is found during hit-trials compared to miss-trials of recognition-memory
tasks (Klimesch, 1997). We tested the hypothesis that theta and alpha are
different modes of a single generator-network (Klimesch et al., 2010) that
drives effective memory. Taking an individual-differences approach, we do
predicted recognition-memory-related alpha and theta oscillations would
covary over a large participant sample. We predicted 1) a strong negative
correlation between posterior-alpha and anterior-theta rhythms across
participants at both encoding and retrieval, indicating they are mutually
exclusive; and 2) a strong correlation between the two oscillations and accuracy and response speed, indicating relevance to memory-outcome. First,
alpha- and theta-oscillation durations (ignoring memory-performance)

Poster Session F
and were significantly positively correlated (encoding: r(55)=0.26; retrieval:
r(55)=0.49, p<0.05), inconsistent with our first prediction. Also inconsistent
with alpha-theta mutual exclusivity, that portion of the rhythmic signals
that differentiated memory success (hits-misses) were not significantly correlated across participants. Testing our second set of predictions the alpha
measure correlated significantly with accuracy and negatively with latency
across participants, but the theta measure, apart from differentiating hits
from misses, did not significantly explain individual variability in memory.
Our findings challenge the hypothesis that alpha and theta oscillations
share a generator, or are in fact mutually exclusive, and also problematize the idea that theta oscillations play a major role in item-recognition
memory.

F85
DYNAMICS OF MEMORY ENCODING: LARGE-SCALE BRAIN NETWORK FLUCTUATIONS DURING PRESTIMULUS TIME WINDOWS
Christine A. Godwin1, Joshua K. Grooms1,2, Derek M. Smith1, Shella D. Keilholz1,2,
Eric H. Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology, 2Emory University — Pre-

vious research has demonstrated that fluctuations in large-scale brain networks such as the default mode network (DMN) and task-positive network
(TPN) can predict performance on an attention task several seconds before
a stimulus appears (Thompson et al., 2013). Here we build on these findings to examine if similar prestimulus network dynamics predict successful memory encoding. We used an fMRI incidental subsequent memory
effect procedure and a multiband pulse sequence with a repetition time
(TR) of 700 ms to effectively capture rapid changes in networks. Participants viewed images of faces and scenes and rated the pleasantness of
each image. Importantly, each image was preceded by an extended fixation
period ranging between 15-20 seconds. After scanning, participants completed a recognition memory test consisting of old and new images. We
employed a sliding window correlation analysis to examine fluctuations in
the relationship between the DMN and TPN during 12-second prestimulus windows. Results indicate that prestimulus anticorrelation between the
DMN and TPN distinguishes between remembered and forgotten items.
This finding replicates Thompson and colleagues and suggests that largescale brain networks play an important role in regulating neural processing
underlying memory encoding before events are experienced. In addition,
pairwise sliding window correlations between memory encoding-related
regions (hippocampus, fusiform cortex, and inferior frontal gyrus) indicate
increased prestimulus functional connectivity between encoding-related
regions for subsequently remembered images. Our findings build on the
prestimulus memory encoding literature (e.g., Park & Rugg, 2010) and
illustrate the role of dynamic prestimulus neural processes in cognitive
performance.

F86
HOW ACUTE STRESS DURING CONSOLIDATION AFFECTS
MEMORY FOR NEGATIVE MATERIALS WITH DIFFERENT AROUSAL
LEVELS. Lisa Weinberg1, Audrey Duarte1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology —
Both human and animal research has demonstrated that acute stress affects
memory, and the nature of this effect depends on when the stress occurs.
Stress during consolidation consistently enhances memory, but there is
disagreement as to whether memory for emotional or neutral information
is improved. One reason for this could be that only highly arousing emotional material is differentially affected by acute stress. We manipulated the
arousal level of our stimuli to determine if memory for the most arousing
material will be enhanced as a result of acute psychological stress during
consolidation. We tested recognition memory for neutral, high arousal
negative, and low arousal negative images. During encoding, participants
gave a visual detail rating after seeing each image. During retrieval, participants rated their confidence in each response. We used the Montreal
Imaging Stress Task (MIST) as a psychological stressor during consolidation, and measured salivary cortisol before and after the MIST. Overall,
recognition memory performance was better in the stress group than in the
control group. Participants in the stress group were also more confident in
their correct responses than participants in the control group. Participants
in the stress group were more likely to remember images that they gave
a high visual detail rating to at encoding than participants in the control

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

193

Poster Session F
group. Effects of arousal on memory accuracy and confidence were minimal. These preliminary results indicate that stress during consolidation
improves memory accuracy and increases confidence.

F87
UNCONSCIOUS REACTIVATION OF EPISODIC INFORMATION
DURING MEMORY RETRIEVAL: A FAILURE TO REPLICATE Mason
Price1, Jeffrey Johnson; 1University of Missouri — Several neurocomputational
models of memory predict that episodic retrieval should be accompanied
by reactivation of the cortical representations that were active during
encoding. Consistent with the idea that reactivation is hippocampally-dependent, several fMRI and EEG studies have shown that these effects are
strongly related to conscious retrieval (recollection). Yet, the involvement
of reactivation during weak, and even unconscious, retrieval remains relatively unexplored. One exception is an EEG study by Wimber, Maa ,
Staudigl, Richardson-Klavehn, and Hanslmayr (2012) in which words
were encoded in the context of background visual flicker (6 and 10 Hz) and
then presented at retrieval in the absence of flicker. Phase-locking (intertrial coherence) was observed at the corresponding encoding frequencies
during retrieval, consistent with the reactivation of encoding representations. Given the important implications of such unconscious reactivation,
the current study (n = 18) attempted to replicate these results with a design
that closely followed the previous study. In addition to original retrieval
phase, we included a final memory test in which EEG was recorded while
subjects were explicitly asked to make judgments about the frequency of
flicker previously associated with each word. Whereas, robust phase-locking to the presented flicker was observed at encoding, no evidence of flicker
reactivation was observed during either of the retrieval phases. The failure to replicate unconscious reactivation effects during memory retrieval,
which is particularly surprising given the ideal conditions of the final test
that was explicitly focused on the salient information, are discussed in relation to potential limiting conditions of neural reactivation.

F88
A DUAL-TASK INVESTIGATION OF THE COMPONENT PROCESSES
SUPPORTING EPISODIC FUTURE THINKING Paul F. Hill1, Samantha
T. Boothe1, Rachel A. Diana; 1Virginia Tech — Accumulating research demonstrates extensive functional overlap between episodic recall and imagining
novel future events, or episodic future thinking (EFT). Despite this overlap,
converging behavioral and neuroimaging evidence suggests that constructing future events places increased demands on executive processes necessary to selectively retrieve and bind episodic and contextual details into
a coherent and plausible future event representation. Likewise, the initial
construction of episodic past and future events is characterized by considerable neural differentiation, with EFT evoking a greater neural response in
medial and lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) and right hippocampus. Working memory (WM) is suggested to provide the cognitive workspace necessary to temporarily maintain and organize disparate episodic details into
a coherent future event; however, this hypothesis has not been systematically tested. In the current study, we experimentally manipulated cognitive
load in order to isolate component neurocognitive processes supporting the
construction of temporally and contextually specific future events. Participants were cued to imagine future episodic events while simultaneously
performing one of two cognitively engaging tasks – maintaining information in short-term memory (maintenance condition) or mentally organizing items based on their relative weights (manipulation condition). Similar
paradigms have been used to elicit dissociable responses in ventrolateral
and dorsolateral PFC, respectively. Events imagined during the maintenance and manipulation conditions were less temporally and contextually
specific than those imagined during comparable control trials. These novel
results provide additional evidence for WM’s hypothesized role supporting EFT construction and offer a useful framework for investigating the
neural correlates of component EFT mechanisms.

F89
EPISODIC FUTURE THINKING AND SCENE CONSTRUCTION
AFTER VENTROMEDIAL PREFRONTAL DAMAGE Elisa Ciaramelli1,
Elena Bertossi1, Fabio Aleo2, Davide Braghittoni2; 1Department of Psychology,
University of Bologna, Italy, 2Centre for studies and research in Cognitive Neuro-

194

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
science — There is increasing interest in revealing the cognitive and neural

bases of episodic future thinking (EFT), the ability to imagine specific events
relevant to one’s own future. Functional neuroimaging studies have shown
that EFT engages a set of regions including medial prefrontal cortex, frontal pole, and medial temporal lobes (MTLs). Converging neuropsychological evidence confirms that the MTLs are crucial for EFT. We hypothesize
that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) is another crucial neural
substrate of EFT. vmPFC, indeed, is typically activated while imagining
the future, and vmPFC patients show steep temporal discounting of future
rewards. vmPFC, however, is also strongly activated during imagination of
fictitious (atemporal) experiences, suggesting that this region may support
processes enabling, yet not uniquely related to, EFT, such as scene construction. Here, vmPFC patients, control patients with lesion to the posterior
cortices, and healthy controls underwent a scene construction task requiring to imagine future and fictitious experiences. vmPFC patients were
impaired at constructing both future and fictitious experiences compared
to the control groups, but they were relatively more impaired at imagining future compared to fictitious experiences. Lesion volume in BA 11 of
vmPFC correlated with performance in both future and fictitious scenarios,
whereas lesion volume in BA 32 and BA 10 only correlated with performance in future scenarios. These results suggest that vmPFC is crucial to
imagine novel experiences, and that different regions within vmPFC mediate core construction processes, needed to simulate any complex events,
and processes uniquely related to EFT.

F90
THE IMPACT OF OBJECT-LEVEL STATISTICS ON SUBSEQUENT
MEMORY EFFECTS: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL STUDY
Benjamin Geib1, Simon Davis1, Berry van den Berg1,2, Roberto Cabeza1, Marty
Woldorff1; 1Duke University, 2BCN Neuroimaging Center, University of Groningen,
Groningen, Netherlands — Unfamiliar events may be remembered because
they are more distinctive, whereas familiar events may be remembered
because they fit with a pre-existent semantic schema. We investigated these
different encoding mechanisms by comparing the event related potentials
(ERPs) evoked by items that were subsequently remembered vs. forgotten (subsequent memory effect—SME). Specifically, we examined neural
evoked responses with respect to conceptual familiarity and subsequent
memory in an incidental encoding task. In the task, subjects engaged in the
covert naming of images. Images consisted of a broad range of natural and
man-made objects. Object names varied in frequency; high frequency items
were deemed familiar, and low frequency items were deemed unfamiliar.
In a second session, one day later, old and new object words were presented
in a semantic recognition test. Immediately afterwards, subjects’ perceptual
memory of previously seen objects, as compared to matched exemplars,
was tested. Unfamiliar object words were associated with higher semantic
memorability, an effect that was absent with respect to perceptual memorability, suggesting that conceptual frequency impacts semantic, but not
perceptual memorability. Preliminary ERP results, with respect to semantic
SMEs, support prior findings of a late positive complex (LPC), but also suggest a stronger, earlier-onsetting, long-lasting, prefrontal negativity. This
effect appears to be selectively driven by successfully remembered familiar concepts, suggesting that it may be attributable to facilitated semantic
access. These results help to clarify the nature of encoding operations with
respect to conceptual familiarity.

F91
AGE DIFFERENCES IN HIPPOCAMPAL ACTIVATION DURING
FALSE RECOGNITION OF OBJECTS Laura E. Paige1, Brittany S. Cassidy1,2,
Angela H. Gutchess1; 1Brandeis University, 2Indiana University — Research shows

age-related increases in gist-based processes that lead to greater false recognition. An open question regards what brain regions are involved in these
age differences, responding as a function of gist. Gist, memory processes
driven by general concept or perceptual similarity shared across exemplars
(e.g. different chairs) within a category, contributes to false memory, particularly for older adults. Extant work revealed that false recognition in
younger adults is associated with increased hippocampal activation, but in
aging the role of the hippocampus may differ since there is reduced associative memory, important for recombining correct features at retrieval. We
explored how varying degrees of gist differently engaged neural regions,
including the hippocampus, across age groups. Specifically, participants

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F

encoded different set sizes (small, medium, large) of exemplars to vary the
amount of gist. They later made recognition memory judgments for studied (e.g., “old” chairs) and related images (e.g., “new” chair exemplars)
using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Comparing neural age differences across 16 younger and 16 older adults while committing memory
errors (false alarms) for the large versus small set size revealed more hippocampal activity among older adults at the small set size compared to
young. This suggests that reconstructing erroneous memories evokes hippocampal activity for older more than younger adults at small set sizes.
Exploratory parametric modulation analyses revealed that younger adults
had increased anterior cingulate activity relative to older adults as set size
decreased, suggesting younger adults potentially utilize monitoring more
than older adults when there is less gist information.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
F92
SHIFTS IN CONNECTIVITY DURING PROCEDURAL LEARNING
AFTER MOTOR CORTEX INHIBITION Leonora Wilkinson1, Adam Steel1,
2

1

1

3

4

Sunbin Song , Devin Bageac , Kris Knutson , Ziad S. Saad , Steven J. Gotts , Eric
M. Wassermann1; 1Behavioral Neurology Unit, National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, 2Human Cortical Physiology Section, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 3Scientific and Statistical Computing Core,
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, 4Laboratory
of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes
of Health — Inhibitory transcranial magnetic stimulation has been widely
used to inactivate cortical areas selectively. One method, continuous theta
burst stimulation, applied over the primary motor cortex depresses motor
output excitability via a local effect and also impairs subsequent procedural
learning. This could be related to response changes in the stimulated area
and/or a local effect or a changes in its the connectivity to other regions
in itsof a distributed network. To investigate this question, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine changes in brain activation and connectivity during motor sequence learning after application of
real and sham continuous theta burst stimulation over the motor cortex.
Compared to sham, real stimulation reduced learning-related functional
connectivity between motor (primary motor cortex, dorsal premotor &
supplementary motor areas) and visual (superior & inferior occipital gyri)
areas, while increasing connectivity between frontal associative (superior &
inferior frontal gyri), cingulate (dorsal & middle cingulate), and temporal
areas. There were no local effects on learning-related activations. Inhibitory
stimulation of primary motor cortex reduces learning-related coupling in a
motor-based learning network and shifts it to another associative learning
network in a potentially compensatory way. This finding suggests that the
inhibitory transcranial magnetic stimulation can alter network dynamics
and change the distributed network underlying learning.

F93
NOCTURNAL SLEEP SPINDLE EEG FREQUENCIES ARE ASSOCIATED WITH NORMALIZED MOTOR SKILL ACCURACY IN ATTENTION-DEFICIT-HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER. Jared M. Saletin1, William
G. Coon2, Mary A. Carskadon1,3; 1Brown University, 2National Center for Adaptive Neurotechnologies, Albany, NY, 3University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA,
Australia — Pediatric attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder (ADHD) is

associated with motor learning deficits and sleep abnormalities. In adults,
NREM stage 2 sleep spindles predict improvements in motor learning
following sleep. This association is poorly characterized in children, or in
pediatric ADHD. Laboratory sleep was monitored (~10hr) in seven children with ADHD (2F, 11.9±0.9 years, abstaining from medication) and 14
typically-developing controls (4F, 11.7±0.9 years). Participants trained on a
validated motor sequence task (MST) in the evening and were retested the
following morning; analyses focused on MST accuracy (correct sequences
as a proportion of all keystrokes). Linear mixed-effects modeling of the
final two evening and first 2 morning trials confirmed a main-effect of sleep
showing increased accuracy overnight (Wald-χ2=17.56, p<0.001). A significant condition-x-group interaction (Wald-χ2=6.08, p<0.014) indicated that
accuracy improved overnight in ADHD (Wald-χ2=16.61, p<0.001) but not
in controls (Wald-χ2=2.23, p=0.135). Although evening accuracy was lower

in ADHD (Wald-χ2=3.90, p=0.048), morning accuracy did not differentiate groups (Wald-χ2=2.23, p=0.135), suggesting an overnight normalization of performance. NREM Stage 2 EEG power spectra were examined to
explore a possible mechanism underlying this motor skill improvement.
ADHD-status moderated the association between slow spindle activity
(12-13.5 Hz) and overnight accuracy improvement (β=1.289, p=0.023).
Thus, spindle-frequency EEG activity positively predicted improvements
in ADHD (β=0.792, p=0.021) but not in controls (β=0.056, p=0.817). These
data indicate that motor skill learning in children with ADHD, as previously shown in adults, benefits from nocturnal sleep spindle frequency
EEG activity. Sleep disturbance in ADHD, therefore, may in part underlie
cognitive deficits commonly observed in this population.

F94
DISCRETE TO CONTINUOUS: ROBUST AND RELIABLE IMPLICIT
LEARNING ACROSS MOTOR RESPONSE TYPES Daniel J. Sanchez1,
Maneesh K. Yadav1, Tim McCarthy1, Nicolas Ehrhardt2, John Murray1; 1SRI International, 2Stanford University — Motor sequence learning research distinguishes

between discrete-event tasks (e.g., serial reaction time) and continuous-performance tasks (e.g., line tracking). Although these tasks have different
operating characteristics, suggesting that the knowledge representation
may contain different perceptual and motor components, the fundamental
process of sequence learning underlies them both. To examine the hypothesis that these task characteristics do not alter the general process of sequence
learning, we implemented the Serial Interception Sequence Learning (SISL)
task with both discrete- and continuous-performance versions. In the standard SISL task, participants intercept scrolling cues on a computer screen
by making precisely-timed keyboard responses as the cues pass a target
zone. For the present study, we developed SISL variants for a mobile phone
that allowed for discrete (tapping locations with thumbs) and continuous
(sliding a single finger to move a cursor) interception response conditions
with identical stimulus presentations. After 192 repetitions of training on a
12-item sequence, knowledge was assessed as the difference in percentage
correct between trained and novel sequences at test. Controlling for trial
lists across conditions, knowledge expression was robust in both conditions, ps<.01, although slightly higher for the discrete condition, M=7.4%,
SE=2.5%, compared to the continuous condition, M=6.1%, SE=1.9%. Note
that the continuous response condition produced learning despite featuring discrete stimulus events. These results support the theory that sequence
knowledge is based on a goal-oriented representation of information that
will be learned as long as there are repeating consistencies in perceptual
and motor components, and also opens sequence-learning research to
novel interaction methodologies.

F95
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD) AS A POSSIBLE
MEDIATOR BETWEEN EDUCATION AND CAUDATE VOLUME IN
VETERANS Dana Waltzman1,2, Salil Soman1,2,3, J. Kaci Fairchild1,2, Nathan
Hantke1,2, Lisa M. Kinoshita1,2, J. Wesson Ashford1,2, Jerry Yesavage1,2, Helena
C. Kraemer2,4, Maheen Adamson1,2, Ansgar J. Furst1,2; 1War Related Illness and
Injury Study Center, VA Palo Alto Healthcare System, 2Department of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 3Department of Radiology, Harvard
University, 4University of Pittsburgh — Evidence suggests that patients with

PTSD exhibit enhanced and impaired memory of the traumatic event. This
concept may be explained by a multiple memory systems framework, in
which stressful situations activate the dorsal-striatal habit memory system
when the hippocampal declarative memory system becomes inactive and
fails to encode features of the stressful event. We investigated volumetric
differences controlling for estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV) in the
hippocampus and striatum in Veterans with PTSD (N=32) and without
PTSD (N=22), and whether education has an effect on these brain structures. While the groups were matched on age (PTSD M=49.31, SD=10.69;
non-PTSD M=46.32, SD=10.56) and gender (PTSD=4F/28M; non-PTSD=1F/21M), Veterans with PTSD had less education than Veterans without
PTSD overall (p=0.017). There were non-significant trends for hippocampal
and striatal regions to be smaller in Veterans with PTSD. There was a negative correlation between education and PTSD status (p=0.017) and PTSD
symptom severity (p=0.040), suggesting higher education is associated
with reduced PTSD symptoms. However, separate analyses revealed only

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

195

Poster Session F
in patients without PTSD a significant correlation between education and
the left caudate (p<0.001) and right caudate (p=0.032), whereas no such correlations were found for patients with PTSD (p > 0.864). Analogous analyses for the hippocampus did not reveal any effects. In completing a mediator analysis, these findings suggest that PTSD may mediate the effects of
education on striatal brain volume and may attenuate its protective effects
on certain brain structures involved in PTSD pathology.

F96
OSCILLATORY CORTICAL DYNAMICS OF IMPLICIT LEARNING IN
PATIENTS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA Leighton Hinkley1, Sophia Vinogradov2, Melissa Fisher2, Danielle Mizuiri1, Bruno Biagianti2, Srikantan Nagarajan1;
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, UCSF, 2Department of Psychiatry, UCSF — An emerging hypothesis in the neuropathology of schizo1

phrenia is that alterations in oscillatory activity contribute to cognitive and
behavioral symptoms prevalent in the disorder. Here, we use magnetoencephalographic imaging (MEGI) to test the hypothesis that impoverished
oscillatory activity over frontal cortices impedes implicit skill learning in
schizophrenia. MEG data was collected using a 275-channel biomagnetometer (VSM MedTech) during a modified serial reaction time task (SRTT)
using manual or vocal movements. Individuals were instructed to respond
to a short vowel presented in the auditory domain at the beginning of each
trial. Subjects either responded by speaking the vowel they have heard
(vocal), or pressing a button (manual) corresponding to one of four spatial locations. Whole-brain oscillatory power changes were examined in
the beta (12-30Hz), gamma (30-55Hz) and high gamma (65-115Hz) bands.
Patients with schizophrenia either failed to show learning effects (learners)
or performed at a pace similar to healthy controls (non-learners). Neurophysiologically, a decrease in beta and an increase in high-gamma power
localized to bilateral frontal cortex in healthy controls around movement
onset. Schizophrenia learners, while performing like healthy controls,
showed increased gamma suppression following movement onset over
motor cortices in the frontal lobe (p<0.005) suggesting a compensatory
mechanism, while schizophrenia non-learners failed to recruit sufficient
high-gamma activation over the ipsilateral hemisphere compared to both
controls and learner counterparts (p<0.005). This data indicates that impairments in recruiting high-frequency neural synchrony translates into a deficit in rapid cognitive learning. These neuroimaging-based markers have
the potential to track recovery following cognitive-based rehabilitation.

F97
THERE IS A BENEFIT OF TESTING WITHOUT FEEDBACK ON THE
ABILITY OF ALPHABETIC (BUT NOT WORD LEARNERS) TO READ
MADE-UP NAMES FOR CRITTER OBJECTS IN A NOVEL ORTHOGRAPHY. Jackie Liederman1, Allyson Alfonso1; 1Boston University — Six words

were created in a novel orthography consisting of five hieroglyphics associated with five sounds. The meaning of these words was presented in Critter
stories wherein participants (N= 105) were trained to criterion to match the
sound of two different words to a picture of a make-believe category of
toys, pets, or instruments. Word Learners were trained to match a pair of
hieroglyphics to the sound of a Critter word; Alphabetic Learners matched
one hieroglyphic with one letter name. The groups were matched for IQ
and reading ability. Half of each group was tested on a Categorization
task before a Word Recognition task; half in the reverse order. Despite the
absence of feedback, Alphabetic Learners benefited from being first tested
on Categorization tasks before they undertook a word recognition task as
follows: they were better at rejecting several kinds of foils, and responded
more rapidly when the word was located in the first than second position.
Even in terms of Categorization itself (e.g., choosing which of two written
Critter words was a Pet), Alphabetic Learners were better when Categorization testing occurred first. None of these differences were significant in
Alphabetic Learners when they performed the Critter Word Recognition
task before Categorization testing. In contrast, Word Learners, irrespective
of task order, did not improve their performance across testing of these two
tasks. Therefore testing in the absence of feedback can powerfully improve
learning new words in a new orthography only in those trained by means
of an Alphabetic system.

196

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

F98
THE EFFECT OF REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ON NEURAL SYNCHRONY IN THE STRIATUM Pierson Fleischer1, Sebastien Helie1; 1Purdue
University — Past research has shown that the basal ganglia (BG) are criti-

cal in supporting skill learning (e.g., Helie et al., 2012a, 2012b). However,
Helie et al. (2013) argue that one problem with many computational cognitive neuroscience (CCN) models of skill learning is that they are often
small-scale simulations that do not exploit the brain’s internal dynamics
to account for the modeled cognitive function. The present work aims to
innovate on current CCN modeling efforts by accurately modeling the BG’s
internal dynamics and exploring the relationship between these dynamics
(e.g. brain oscillations) and cognitive function. Specifically, we simulated a
sparsely interconnected striatum (Ponzi & Wickens, 2010) using the INa,p
+ Ik cell model (Izhikevich, 2007) and connected the model to a simulated
visual cortex. We used this model to simulate a perceptual category learning task with two categories. We measured the periodicity of the striatal
neurons and the synchrony between neurons. After learning the model
showed increased periodic spiking in neurons and decreased synchrony
between neurons associated with the same category. This suggests that
reinforcement learning may be accompanied by a rhythmic de-synchronization of neural firing in the BG, which is consistent with some deficits
being associated with abnormal synchrony in some neuropsychological
populations. Future work should explore the question of whether these
changes are essential for learning or merely a byproduct thereof. A possible future experiment could involve disrupting the patterns found in the
model, either during learning or after learning has occurred, then observing the effect on the model’s performance.

F99
STRENGTHENED BRAIN FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY DETECTED
BY INDEPENDENT COMPONENT ANALYSIS IS ASSOCIATED WITH
CONTEXTUAL INTERFERENCE EFFECT IN MOTOR LEARNING
Ho-Ching Yang1, Chien-Ho Janice Lin1,2, Allan D Wu3, Barbara J Knowlton3, MingChang Chiang1; 1National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, 2Yeong-An Orthopedic
and Physical Therapy Clinic, Taiwan, 3University of California, Los Angeles —
INTRODUCTION: Increasing contextual interference (CI) during practice
by arranging motor sequences in an interleaved order generally induces
superior motor learning than arranging sequences repetitively. To identify
functional brain pathways underlying the CI effect in motor learning, group
independent component analysis (gICA) was applied to analyze fMRI data.
METHODS: On 2 consecutive days, 16 young adults practiced serial reaction time tasks consisting of three distinct 4-element sequences either in an
interleaved or repetitive order 2-4 weeks apart. Retention was evaluated
on Day 5 in an MR scanner. We applied gICA to participants’ fMRI data to
identify 35 statistically independent components as our ROIs whose time
series data were best correlated with the temporal profile the experimental
model (each 18-second task block was followed by an 18-second rest block).
Functional connectivity was gauged by the time-lagged correlation coefficient between the time series data of the components. We then compared
the differences in functional connectivity across the 35 ROIs between the
interleaved and repetitive conditions. RESULTS: Functional connectivity
during retention was stronger following the interleaved than the repetitive practice, especially between the left precentral gyrus and the cerebellar
vermis, and between bilateral calcarine cortices and the left middle temporal cortex. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that motor learning following interleaved practice leads to stronger recruitment of the corticomotor
system and the visuospatial circuit that connects the temporal and occipital cortices. These neural pathways may support the CI benefits of motor
learning following interleaved training.

F100
INVESTIGATING THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF EXECUTIVE
FUNCTIONS DURING FOOTBALL GAMEPLAY Kyle Morgan1,2, Phan
Luu2, Nicholas Price2, Don Tucker1,2; 1University of Oregon Department of Psychology, 2Electrical Geodesics, Inc. — Results from animal studies suggest

frontal corticolimbic systems are involved in the early stages of learning,
whereas brain activity shifts to the hippocampus and posterior cingulate
during the later stages. However, recent human studies using dense-array

2015 Annual Meeting
EEG (dEEG) have shown an increase in frontal corticolimbic involvement
throughout the learning stages as they report an increase in Medial Frontal
Negativity (MFN) amplitude across a multi-session Go/No-Go learning
task. The goal of the present study was to further investigate this finding,
and determine if we can replicate it within a realistic context of football
players going through simulated pre-season cognitive training. We tracked
the neural mechanisms of learning and decision making as former high
school football players were subjected to a multi-day, modified Go/No-Go
task which taught them how to recognize and make informed decisions
about an opposing team’s defensive formations. Dense-array EEG was used
to record the MFN and P300 ERP components. We report on the changes
in these ERP components as our subjects become proficient in the task, and
propose an alteration to the heuristic commonly used to describe the brain
processes associated with visuomotor skill acquisition.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
F101
MUSICAL BEAT PERCEPTION AND PRODUCTION IN CONGENITALLY BLIND ADULTS Laureline Arnaud1,2, Lucie Ménard2,3, Vincent
Gracco1,2; 1McGill University, 2Center for Research on Brain, Language and
Music, 3Université du Québec à Montréal — The brain has a remarkable abil-

ity to adapt when problems occur early in development. In congenitally
blind adults (CB), brain reorganization occurs and brain areas devoted to
vision are taken over for other senses. Apparently as a result, CB adults
often exhibit better performance for auditory processing tasks including
pitch processing tasks. Few studies have investigated rhythm perception or
production in CB adults. The purpose of this study was to test musical beat
perception and production abilities in CB adults. Here, an adaption of the
Beat Alignment Test was used. Fourteen CB adults and fourteen controls
(matched for age, gender, education and formal musical training) participated in the study. Perception: participants had to decide if a beep track
presented simultaneously along with musical excerpts was on or off the
musical beat. There was no significant difference between the perception
score of the blind group and the control group (t(26)=1.39, p=.175). Production: participants tapped along with 14 musical excerpts. The blind group
showed a significantly better ability to match the music tempo than controls (t(26)=2.16 , p=.0399). The variability of tapping was not significantly
different between the groups (t(26)=-1.21, p=.238). Interestingly, significant
correlations were found between perception and production scores for
the controls only (rcc-control=0.69, p=.006; rcv-control= -0.72, p= .003; rccblind=0.19, p=.51; rcv-blind=-0.04, p=.88). In conclusion, blind participants
showed a significantly better ability to tap the beat in synchronization with
the musical beat. These results echo back to previous results obtained in
speech production in congenitally blind adults.

F102
RAPIDLY-LEARNED IDENTIFICATION OF SEIZURES FROM SONIFIED EEG Matan Koplin-Green1, Michael Massone1, Mark Frick1, Psyche Loui1;
1

Wesleyan University — Sonification refers to a process by which data are converted into sound, providing an auditory alternative to visual display. Currently, the prevalent method for diagnosing seizures in epilepsy is by visually reading a patient’s electroencephalogram (EEG). However, sonification
of EEG data provides inherent advantages due to the frequency-sensitive
nature of human auditory perception. We developed a novel EEG sonification algorithm in Max/MSP, whereby voltage values from the seizure and
non-seizure EEG files were assigned notes in a musical scale and played by
a software synthesizer in Logic Pro. We hypothesized that human listeners
would be able to identify seizures simply relying on the sonified EEGs, and
that accuracy of seizure identification would increase after minimal training. Ten-second sound clips were generated from seizure and non-seizure
EEG recordings and presented to subjects (N=52) in two-alternative forcedchoice tests before and after a one-minute training session. Results showed
that before training, subjects performed at chance level in differentiating
seizures from non-seizures (M=53.1%, SD=0.17), but there was a significant improvement of accuracy after the training session (p<.05). After training, subjects successfully distinguished seizures from non-seizures using
the auditory modality alone (M=63.4% correct, SD=0.13). Signal detection
theory analyses demonstrated improvement in sensitivity and reduction

Poster Session F
in response bias as a result of training (d’=0.751, SD=0.75 post-training).
This study demonstrates the potential of sonifying EEGs for the detection
of seizures. Ongoing work involves making EEG sonifications in real-time,
directly from an EEG recording device, and investigating the therapeutic
potential of audible neurofeedback in the treatment of epilepsy.

F103
LIMITATIONS IN FINE-GRAINED WITHIN-CATEGORY SEMANTIC
AUDITORY DISCRIMINATION: INSIGHTS FROM SPATIO-TEMPORAL ANALYSES. Rosanna De Meo1,2, Pawel J. Mastusz1,2, Jean-François
Knebel1,2, Micah M. Murray1,2,3, W. Reid Thompson4, Stephanie Clarke1,2; 1Vaudois University Hospital Center, 2University of Lausanne, 3Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, 4Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine — Correct recog-

nition of individual sound objects within a semantic category (e.g., bird
songs) involves cortical regions along a left lateralized temporo-fronto-parietal network. Here, we investigated how representations of other environmental sounds, i.e. heartbeats, differ when sounds have been correctly
versus incorrectly categorized. Thirteen medical students, of which 2 were
excluded due to poor performance during the training session, participated
in this study. EEG and behavioural data were recorded from eleven participants who completed: 1) an audio-visual training session requiring recognition of 4 categories of real patients’ heartbeat sounds (the training session
ended when participants reached 70% accuracy); and 2) a testing session
requiring discrimination of the 4 previously learned categories on recordings of new heartbeat sounds. Accuracy data showed a significant decrease
in performance from the training session to the EEG session, but which still
remained significantly above chance level. EEG analyses compared correctly vs. incorrectly recognized items with a paired t-test of source estimations calculated for each participant. The results identified a time-window
showing different topographies, and by extension different brain generators. Source estimations revealed several clusters in left frontal and parietal
areas, frontal and temporal areas, as well as the cingulate and the thalamus,
bilaterally. Differences were mainly driven by a higher activity for the Miss
condition. Correct and incorrect categorization demonstrates that errors in
discrimination of objects within a semantic category can be driven more
by incorrect labeling, rather than by limitations at a lower, i.e. perceptual,
processing level.

F104
MOTOR REPRESENTATIONS OF SPEECH SPECIFICALLY CONTRIBUTE TO PERCEPTION OF DISTORTED SPEECH SOUNDS Helen
Nuttall1, Daniel Kennedy-Higgins1, John Hogan2, Joseph Devlin2, Patti Adank1;
Speech, Hearing and Phonetic Sciences, University College London (UCL),
London, UK, 2Experimental Psychology, University College London (UCL), London,
UK — Past studies have shown that activity in speech motor cortex is essen1

tial for speech perception, but the precise role of motor cortex in speech
perception is unclear. There are two views on how the motor system is
involved in perception. Both posit that listeners mentally imitate/simulate
others’ actions during speech perception to aid understanding. However,
the views differ in their predictions on which conditions maximally recruit
motor cortex. One asserts that there is greater recruitment when speech
perception is challenging, such as when speech is distorted or heard in
background noise. The other predicts that motor recruitment is greatest
when perception is easiest. We aimed to disambiguate between these predictions. We measured Motor Evoked Potentials (MEPs) to probe excitability of the primary motor cortex (M1) representation of the lip muscle, with
M1 hand as a control area, to test if MEPs were greater when listening to
clear versus distorted VCV (vowel-consonant-vowel) stimuli. We also used
a place-of-articulation contrast to confirm if the effect was modulated in an
articulator-specific manner. Finally, we compared individual differences in
MEPs to a behavioral measure (identification) of speech perception. MEPs
for lip, but not hand, were larger for distorted stimuli than for clear stimuli
and MEPs for distorted VCVs were bigger for stimuli produced using the
lips. Also, we found a positive link between identification of the distorted
VCV sounds and MEP size. Our findings indicate that activity of motor
cortex during speech perception serves to support and facilitate challenging speech perception.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

197

Poster Session F

F105
THETA-BAND PHASE TRACKING IN INTERRUPTED SPEECH Shweta
Soni1, Dillon A. Hambrook1, Matthew S. Tata1; 1University of Lethbridge — When
speech is interrupted by intermittent gaps of silence it becomes quite difficult to understand. When those gaps are filled with broad-band noise,
speech becomes more intelligible. This Phonemic Restoration or “Picket
Fence” effect has been interpreted in the context of perceptual “filling in”
- a kind of temporal interpolation of the signal. Recent work has shown
that successful perception of normal fluent speech is accompanied by
strong phase-locking between theta-band EEG oscillations and the acoustic
envelope. We tested the theory that degrading speech with gaps of silence
impairs perception because it breaks this phase-tracking effect. We further
tested whether filling the silent gaps with noise restores perception by
restoring phase tracking to the original envelope. We found that inserting
gaps of silence into fluent speech reduces intelligibility, strongly degrades
the dynamics of the speech envelope, and breaks EEG theta-phase tracking. However, filling silent gaps with noise does not restore theta-phase
tracking, despite improving intelligibility. We conclude that disruption of
theta-phase tracking may be a cause of degraded speech perception, but
that other mechanism are likely responsible for the “filling in” phenomenon observed in Phonemic Restoration.

F106
ENCODING POLYPHONIC MUSICAL MOTIVES: EFFECTS OF
VOICE SEPARATION AND TEMPORAL OVERLAP ON MISMATCH
NEGATIVITY (MMN) Madeline Huberth1, Takako Fujioka1; 1Stanford University — In music, a motif often repeats in different melodic lines. Previous
event-related potential (ERP) studies have shown that the mismatch negativity (MMN) reflects simultaneous encoding of different melodic lines.
However, occasionally motif entrances occur before the conclusion of the
previous motif. Here we specifically investigated whether repeated motif
presentation across two separate voices is encoded as a single entity or
two separate entities, and whether motives overlapping in time impede
or enhance the strength of encoding. We recorded the electroencephalogram (EEG) from 15 musicians, using a repeating 5-note motif with varied
entry pitch level and number of overlapping notes. For 18% of trials, the 5th
note was a contour changing deviant. The ‘one-voice’ arrangement used a
half-octave range for motif entry pitch, while in the ‘two-voice’ arrangement, alternating motives were moved one octave lower. In both cases, the
entrances overlapped by two notes, or none (e.g., silence in between). With
zero-note overlap, MMN in frontal electrodes was larger in the one-voice
compared to the two-voice condition. This suggests that even if the same
motif repeats, presenting them across the two voices makes its encoding
specific to each voice. In contrast, with motives overlapping by two notes,
no significant MMN was observed, while differences between standard
and deviant ERP were significant in the centro-parietal electrodes for both
voice conditions. Moreover, the N1 peaks were significantly delayed compared to those in zero-overlap conditions. These observations suggest that
different memory processes in the auditory cortex are active when melodies are temporally concurrent.

F107
NEURONAL ENTRAINMENT TO AUDITORY STIMULI AT MULTIPLE
TIMESCALES Gabriel A Nespoli1, Paolo Ammirante1, Frank A Russo1; 1Ryerson
University — Tracking pitch and beat are important objectives when engag-

ing with music. Representation of these dimensions in the brain takes the
form of synchronization, or entrainment. Using electroencephalography
(EEG), subcortical neurons in the inferior colliculus have been found to
synchronize their firing rates with the periodicities in tones, called the frequency-following response (FFR). Neuronal synchronization has also been
seen at the beat level as a steady-state evoked potential (SSEP), presumably
of cortical origin. However, how these forms of synchronization might be
related across timescales is largely unknown. Participants listened to an
isochronous train of tones while FFRs and SSEPs were measured simultaneously. The stimulus contained both short (tones) and long (beat) periodicities. It was found that the spectrum of EEG activity closely matched
the spectrum of the stimulus at both timescales. In addition, the extent of
synchronization to short timescale periodicities was correlated with (a)
behavioral measures of musical engagement, and (b) with extent of syn-

198

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
chronization to long timescale periodicities. These findings indicate that
the experience-dependent plasticity seen in musicians manifests itself at
multiple cortical levels corresponding to oscillations at different timescales
present in music.

F108
NEURAL DYNAMICS OF NOVEL AUDITORY-MOTOR MAP LEARNING Alexander Herman1, Damien Harrell2, Megan Thompson1, John Houde1, Srikantan Nagarajan1; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University of Connecticut — The neural dynamics underlying audiomotor learning are not

well understood. This study sought to characterize the neural correlates
of feedback in audiomotor map learning through the use of a magnetoencephalography imaging (MEGI)-compatible touchscreen. We hypothesized that learning a novel audiomotor map task would correspond to the
development of an internal model of the map, manifesting through efference copy-based suppression in the auditory cortex in correct feedback and
error/conflict monitoring in frontal areas in incorrect feedback. 15 subjects
were trained to identify locations on a touchscreen corresponding to one
of six randomly assigned tones. Following training, subjects were given a
target tone via headphones and attempted to reproduce it by identifying
the corresponding area on the touchscreen. 10 out of 15 subjects demonstrated better-than chance responses improving upon their initial performance, indicating stable learning. The mean correct response rate in these
10 subjects increased from 24% initially to 38% at the conclusion of the ~1.5
hour experiment. In addition to demonstrating an increased rate of correct
responses, MEGI showed significant differences in post-learning response
between correct and incorrect trials. Correct trials showed increased suppression in early high gamma (125ms) and theta/alpha (200ms) power over
incorrect trials. Frontal areas, however, showed increased high gamma
power (250ms) followed by a relative increase in beta power (350ms). This
increased activation in areas responsible for error monitoring in incorrect
trials and suppression in sensorimotor areas during correct responses is
consistent with efferent copy comparison based on the development of an
audiomotor map internal model.

F109
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR FACILITATION OF
AUDITORY CHANGE DETECTION WITH SPATIALIZED AUDIO Matthew Jesso1, Daniel M. Roberts, George A. Buzzell, Craig G. McDonald, Carryl L.
Baldwin; 1George Mason University — Individuals often fail to notice changes to
auditory scenes containing several sound objects unless attention is directed
to the object that may change, a phenomenon termed “change deafness.”
In the current task, EEG in conjunction with a continuous change detection paradigm was utilized to investigate the relative importance of spatial
and identity information to change detection performance. Participants
listened to auditory scenes composed of six unique auditory objects and
attempted to identify when changes to the scene (disappearance of one of
the six objects) occurred. Between blocks, the objects in the scene were dissociated by either object identity information alone, or both object identity
and object location information. Stimuli were presented over headphones,
with spatialized audio accomplished via the use of a generic head-related
transfer function. In an analysis of trials in which a change to the auditory scene occurred, the event-related potential (ERP) was computed timelocked to the occurrence of the scene change. This analysis revealed that the
P3b component of the ERP was not only larger for detected changes relative
to undetected changes in general, but was also larger for changes presented
in trials with spatialized audio relative to trials without spatial information.
It is suggested that spatial information within the auditory scene supports
auditory stream segregation, leading to improved change detection.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory
F110
MULTISTAGE AUDIOVISUAL SPEECH PROCESSING MODULATING THE MISMATCH NEGATIVITY Orestis Papaioannou1, Julia Strand2,
Christian Graulty1, Kevin Ortego1, Enriqueta Canseco-Gonzalez1; 1Reed College, 2Carleton College — This study investigates the time-course of audiovisual (AV) integration of speech using the mismatch negativity (MMN)

2015 Annual Meeting
event-related potential as a temporal marker. In an oddball paradigm with
McGurk-style stimuli, congruent AV syllables (/ba/ or /da/) served as the
standard, while two types of stimuli served as deviants: auditory only (AO)
and audiovisual (AV). In the AO deviants, the audio of the standard was
replaced by an ambiguous syllable lying on the ba-da boundary, while the
video remained the same as the standard. In the AV deviant, the video presented the opposite syllable to the standard (i.e. ba for da, and vice versa)
while the audio was the same ambiguous stimulus used in the AO deviants. We found no significant differences in MMN amplitude or latency
to AV and AO deviants in participants with a high ease of integration (as
assessed by a McGurk Integration Measure), suggesting that the MMN was
unaffected by perceived audiovisual integration. In contrast, participants
with low ease of integration showed a larger MMN for AO stimuli than for
AV stimuli. This pattern of results suggests a multi-stage AV integration
process, where stimuli are first determined to be audio-visually congruent
or incongruent and then integrated to form a multimodal percept, with the
latter process taking place at a time too late to affect the MMN.

F111
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF LETTER-SOUND PROCESSING
IN ENGLISH ADULT READERS Osamu Takai1, Anthony Herdman1; 1University of British Columbia — One of the first steps to learning to read in alphabetic languages is to associate alphabet letters (e.g., B) to their names (e.g.,
/bi:/), but the literature lacks knowledge of how multiple brain regions
dynamically achieve such associations. Our goal was to uncover the neural
networks for the audiovisual processing of single alphabet letters. Letter
names and written letters were presented simultaneously as congruent or
incongruent audiovisual stimuli. We combined dipole source models of the
unimodal responses to identify node locations for performing functional
connectivity analyses of audiovisual responses. We hypothesized that the
incongruent stimuli, which do not match, would evoke stronger interregional connectivity in order resolve the audiovisual conflict (cf. Re-entrant
theory, Di Lollo et al., 2000). However, we rejected this hypothesis because
congruent audiovisual stimuli elicited stronger and more global network
synchronizations in the theta-band (4-8 Hz) between 160 ms to 550 ms than
did incongruent stimuli. We concluded that the functional connectivity
observed for congruent stimuli likely involved global network coherence
for object binding (e.g., Ward, 2003), not re-entrant processing.

F112
AUDIOVISUAL COLOUR-WORD STROOP MATCHING TASK:
INTERFERENCE BUT NOT FACILITATION FROM WRITTEN WORD
MEANING Ido Bornstein1, Anthony Herdman1; 1University of British Columbia —

Previous audiovisual Stroop studies used spoken colour words as ignored
distractors when performing the visual Stroop task; however, making auditory stimuli task-relevant might identify how written word meaning affects
an audiovisual judgement. Our study’s main objective was to explore how
written word meanings affect audiovisual matching of spoken colour
words and font colours. We presented colour words written in congruent
or incongruent font colours simultaneously with spoken colour words.
Participants manually indicated if the spoken word and font colour were
“Same” or “Different”, while ignoring written word meaning. We recorded
response times and accuracy to measure interference and facilitation effects
between experimental and control conditions. We hypothesised that incongruent written words (e.g., “red”) would interfere with “Same” responses
(e.g., font colour = green, spoken = /green/) but facilitate “Different”
responses (e.g., font colour = green, spoken = /blue/); and that congruent
written words (e.g., “green”) would facilitate “Same” responses (e.g., font
colour = green, spoken = /green/) but interfere with “Different” responses
(e.g., font colour = green, spoken = /blue/). Our findings showed large
interference effects but no facilitation effects on audiovisual judgements.
The largest interference effect occurred when the written word was incongruent with both the spoken word and font colour. Smaller interference
effects occurred when the written word was congruent with either the
spoken word or font colour. Consistent with previous Stroop findings, our
audiovisual matching task showed that in the case of cross-modal colour
judgements, written word meaning predominantly interferes with but does
not facilitate performance.

Poster Session F

F113
INVESTIGATING BODY PERCEPTION IN HEALTHY AND EATING
DISORDERED FEMALES. Katie Groves1, Steffan Kennett2, Helge Gillmeister3; 1University of Essex, 2University of Essex, 3University of Essex — There is

growing evidence to suggest that human bodies are processed distinctively
from other visual stimuli in the brain. In particular, event related potential studies have shown that the visual observation of human bodies elicits
an enhanced N190 component over occipito-parietal electrodes. However,
little research has addressed whether the way people think and feel about
their own body and those of others’, modulates the N190. Therefore, the
aim of the present study was to explore the relationship between electrophysiological body perception, cognitive body perception and body image.
Electroencephalography (EEG) was used to assess the prevalence of the
body-specific N190 component and the ‘Eating Disorders Inventory 2’
(EDI2) was used to assess unhealthy attitudes and behaviours relating to
one’s body including body image. Cognitive body perception was measured
with body size estimation tasks and tactile estimation tasks. Three groups
of females were recruited; those had had experienced either Anorexia or
Bulimia at least once in their life, and those who reported no history of
body perception disorders or body image disturbances. Task responses and
N190 amplitude were correlated and compared between groups, with findings indicating a close link between the early visual processing of human
bodies and the observers’ thoughts about their own body. Additionally, an
enhanced body-specific N190 in response to same-sex stimuli was found,
with a more pronounced effect in clinical groups. Such findings therefore
suggest a relationship between the visual analysis of human bodies and
the observer’s body image during very early stages of cortical processing.

F114
THE SHAPE AND COLOR OF MUSIC: NATURALLY BIASED ASSOCIATIONS ACROSS SENSORY DIMENSIONS. Leah Sanson1, Ferrinne
Spector2; 1Edgewood College, 2Edgewood College — Adults do not usually see

colors and shapes while hearing music. Nevertheless, there are surprising consistencies among adults when asked to match stimuli across these
sensory dimensions. Examining such consistencies may reveal clues into
underlying perceptual processes, particularly when combined with the
experiences of individuals with synesthesia, who do experience extraneous
concrete percepts in response to sensory stimuli. The purpose of this study
was to combine the two approaches and examine whether non-synesthetic
adults match visualizations to music similarly to that of audio-visual synesthetes - who perceive color and/or shape when hearing sounds/music.
In each of two experiments, non-synesthetic adults (n = 40) listened to 14
music clips and made two-alternative forced choices between congruent
and incongruent visualizations. In both experiments, the congruent visualizations came from audio-visual synesthetes responses to the target music
clip, and the incongruent visualizations came from responses to a different
clip of music from either the same audio-visual synesthete (Experiment
1) or a non-synesthete (Experiment 2). We randomized trial presentation
with each experiment and counterbalanced the presentation of experiments
across participants. Preliminary results from a subset of non-synesthetes (n
= 11) suggest that non-synesthetes associate music to visualizations similarly to synesthetes. These results support the hypothesis that synesthetic
percepts and non-synesthetic sensory associations may reflect the same
inherent neural organization, with both providing valuable insight into the
processes underlying multisensory perception.

F115
WHITE MATTER INTEGRITY IN VISUAL, MOTOR AND LIMBIC
BRAIN REGIONS PREDICT SUBSEQUENT GAMING SKILL Johan
Mårtensson1,3, Jürgen Gallinat2, Ulman Lindenberger1, Simone Kühn1; 1Max
Planck Institute for Human Development, 2Charité University Medicine, 3Lund
university — Video gaming as a pastime has increased rapidly over the past

thirty years and gaming is becoming a dominant cultural medium. Today
every American household has an average of two video game players.
Recent longitudinal findings into the effects of video gaming on the brain
showed that practicing a 3D platform game on a mobile console could lead
to increases in local cerebral grey matter volume. We employed diffusion
tensor imaging to investigate whether white matter integrity between
known areas of grey matter change can be used to predict later gaming skill

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

199

Poster Session F
in novice video game players. Probabilistic tractography between the right
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the right hippocampus and the cerebellum
revealed that participants with higher values of fractional anisotropy in
visual areas, the limbic system and motor regions in the right hemisphere
became better gamers following training. An independent whole-brain
search in major white matter connections using tract based spatial statistics corroborated these findings by showing highly similar areas bilaterally
when looking for voxels that were predictive of later skill level. Our findings point towards the importance of local white matter integrity in task
relevant visuomotor and limbic areas of the brain for training outcomes in
a 3D platform game.

F116
HAPTIC PRIMING IN EMBODIED COGNITION: SOMATOSENSORY
CONTRIBUTIONS TO ACCESSING MOTOR KNOWLEDGE Chelsea
Ekstrand1, Eric Lorentz1, Layla Gould1, Marla Mickleborough1, Ron Borowsky1;
University of Saskatchewan — Cognitive embodiment refers to idea that cog-

1

nitive processes are rooted in perception and action experience. Although
much research has been focused on motor involvement in response to presented stimuli of graspable objects, somatosensory contributions to accessing motor knowledge have remained relatively unexplored. We employed
a haptic vibratory prime to either the hands or the feet in order to pre-engage the somatosensory cortex, followed by a picture stimulus of a graspable object. Stimuli consisted of items either associated with the hands (e.g.,
‘cup’) and items more associated with the feet (e.g., ‘skis’). Objects more
commonly used by the hands (i.e., hand items) should show faster response
times when preceded by a somatosensory prime than items less commonly
used by the hands (i.e., foot items) if motor knowledge is involved. In
Experiment 1, participants were required to name the object as quickly as
possible. Reaction times (RTs) indicated that somatosensory priming had
no effect on hand items and hindered naming performance on items associated with the feet, suggesting that somatosensory and motor knowledge
have differential effects in naming. Experiment 2 required participants to
state how they would interact with the presented object. RTs indicated
that somatosensory priming benefitted responses to hand related objects
regardless of the vibration location (i.e., foot or hand) and that somatosensory stimulation of the feet hindered responses to items associated with
the feet. Together, these results suggest that somatosensory priming may
influence access to motor knowledge for objects depending on the nature
of their affordances.

F117
VISUAL PREDICTIVE INFORMATION MODULATES MUSICAL SYNTACTIC PROCESSING: AN ERP STUDY Hana Shin1, Takako Fujioka1;
1
Stanford University — The early right anterior negativity (ERAN), a component of event-related brain potentials (ERPs), is typically elicited when
an out-of-key chord replaces the most expected chord in a tonal sequence,
thereby creating a violation of syntactic expectation. Here, we examined
how anticipatory process influences the ERAN when information about
the critical chord is available visually before hearing the sound. We
recorded the EEG from musicians using the same auditory chord stimuli
with two types of visual stimulus: the exact musical notation, and words
representing the quality of the last chord (“regular”, or “irregular”). The
irregular sequences constituted 50% of the total stimuli. An audio-only control condition was also used. The ERAN was observed in both right and
left fronto-central electrodes in all conditions. In the left hemisphere, the
ERAN was larger and more consistent across all conditions compared to
the right hemisphere, where the ERAN was much smaller and more negatively shifted between 100ms and 400ms in the music-notation condition. In
addition, in both visual conditions, a gradual DC shift starting about 300ms
after the first chord separated the regular and irregular conditions over the
course of the whole sequence. The shift likely indicates the build-up of constant anticipation for the following chords. Interestingly, this component
was strongly right-lateralized in the word condition. Our data suggest that
the knowledge of the upcoming chord provided by musical and linguistic
information differently modifies how auditory information is processed
between the hemispheres.

200

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

F118
THE SPACE AROUND YOU. VENTRAL INTRAPARIETAL AREA
CODES PERIPERSONAL SPACE AROUND ONE’S OWN AND
OTHER FACES. Andrea Serino1, Manuela Ansaldo2,3, Gaspare Galati2,3; 1Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Department of Psychology, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy, 3Laboratory of Neuropsychology, Foundation Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy — The ventral

intraparietal area (VIP) both in humans (Sereno and Huang 2006; Huang
et al. 2012) and in monkeys (Avillac et al. 2005) underlies a multisensory
representation of the space around the body (i.e., peripersonal space, PPS),
in that it integrates tactile stimuli on the face with visual stimuli occurring
within the PPS. Here we show that the PPS representation in VIP also codes
other people’s PPS. By combining psychophysics and fMRI experiments
based on virtual reality, we found that visual stimuli approaching the face
of another character activates the representation of one’s own PPS and are
coded by VIP as they were approaching one’s own face. We suggest that
this mechanism, by re-mapping the space around the Other as the space
around oneself, might be a primitive mechanism of social cognition.

THINKING: Other
F119
STRUCTURAL MRI IN DEFAULT MODE NETWORK REGIONS IS
RELATED TO DISSOCIATION AND ABSORPTION Matthew Jerram1,
Alyson Negreira1; 1Suffolk University — Dissociation is a multifaceted con-

struct defined by disruptions in consciousness that range from normative
to pathological. One of dissociation’s components is absorption, which
reflects an introspective approach and is associated with imagery and daydreaming. Little is known about the neural correlates of dissociative traits,
including absorption, in healthy populations. The internal focus of dissociation, especially absorption, leads to speculation of default mode network
(DMN) involvement, as this network is active during introspection. This
study used structural MRI (sMRI) metrics and dissociative trait measures to
examine the hypothesis that dissociation measures, specifically absorption,
would be positively correlated with sMRI metrics in DMN regions. Sixteen
right-handed healthy men were recruited from the community and underwent MRI scanning and psychological testing. Dissociation was measured
using the Dissociative Experiences Scale-II (DES-II) and its absorption subscale (DES-Ab). sMRI data were analyzed using a standard analysis pipeline in freesurfer and several metrics were extracted, including gray matter
volume (GVM), cortical surface area (SA) and cortical thickness (CT). The
metrics were obtained only in regions identified as part of the DMN in Yeo,
et al (2011) and aggregated into a single DMN ROI for the brain. These
metrics were correlated with DES-II total scores and DES-Ab. Results supported the hypothesis, as DES-II and DES-Ab were significantly correlated
with CT (DES-II: r = 0.42; DES-Ab: r = 0.50). GVM and SA were not significantly correlated with either DES-II or DES-Ab. The results suggest the
DMN may be the neural foundation of dissociation and absorption.

F120
6 X 3 = … 20? EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS REVEAL HEMISPHERIC DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES IN PROCESSING OF
MATHEMATICAL FACTS Danielle S. Dickson1, Kara D. Federmeier1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Multiple studies of mathematical fact
retrieval in the context of multiplication problems have used ERPs to examine how correct versus incorrect answers are processed, and, like sentence
final words that are contextually congruent or not, N400-like effects are
typically reported. Answers that are unexpected (incorrect) but are closely
related to the correct answer have been reported to elicit intermediate
N400s. Despite interesting fMRI and lesion work, there have been no ERP
studies investigating each hemisphere’s response to these types of stimuli.
Therefore, we presented equation contexts (“6 x 3 =”) serially at central
fixation, and then critical answers (either correct, unexpected/related, or
unexpected/unrelated) were presented to either the left visual field (right
hemisphere, LVF/RH), right visual field (left hemisphere, RVF/LH) or centrally while ERPs were recorded. In the N400 timewindow, we found an
effect that tracked correctness but was not responsive to relatedness – and
this effect was similar across both hemispheres and in central presentation.

2015 Annual Meeting
Thus, both hemispheres seem able to assess answers for correctness at fairly
early stages of processing (ie, initial semantic analysis). The relatedness of
incorrect answers in our study was only appreciated later, reflected by a
late positive complex (LPC), with the largest LPC for incorrect/unrelated
answers, an intermediate one for incorrect/related answers, and the least
positivity for correct answers. Interestingly, this LPC effect did differ across
hemispheres (most prominent in the LVF/RH), suggesting that the RH
may have a unique contribution to the retrieval of mathematical facts and
their subsequent assessment and analysis.

F121
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS OF GLOBAL AND LOCAL VISUAL PERCEPTION ON MIND WANDERING AND CREATIVE COGNITION
Emilee R. Naylor1,2, Marjorie Taylor1; 1University of Oregon, 2Georgetown University — Creativity is a driving force for innovation in science, technology,

engineering, mathematics, the arts and humanities. Existing research has
focused on cognitive and conceptual explanations for how creative ideas
are generated, but much less has been asked about the roles perceptual
mechanisms play in facilitating creative output. This study investigated
the effects of global (broadened) and local (narrowed) visual perceptual
priming on mind wandering and creative cognition in young adults (n=91).
Visual priming was implemented using a variant of the Navon-letter-task
paradigm (Förster, 2012; Navon, 1977). Errors and Response Times (RTs)
were recorded during the priming task and used to assess the efficacy with
which participants adopted either a global or local visual field. Two divergent thinking Alternative Uses Tasks (AUTs) and a novel, social creativity task were used to assess creative cognition. Creativity was calculated
based on the Consensual Assessment Technique (Amabile, 1982) using 3
independent judges blind to condition. Self-reported mind wandering was
retrospectively measured after the priming task. An RT by priming condition interaction significantly predicted percent increase in creativity scores
between pre- and post-priming, such that global perception yielded the
highest increase in creative cognition. Global perception also elicited the
highest rates of mind wandering. Taken together, these results suggest that
global visual priming induces mind wandering, which, in turn, may facilitate creative thinking. Further, the data show that creative output can be
augmented by activating specific perceptual processes during incubation
and have implications for education and pedagogically-oriented creativity
training programs.

F122
NETWORK CENTRALITY IN PREFRONTAL CORTEX IS ASSOCIATED
WITH GENERAL INTELLIGENCE Kirsten Hilger1,2, Matthias Ekman3, Christian J. Fiebach1,2,3, Ulrike Basten1; 1Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2IDeA Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt
am Main, Germany, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands — Graph theory provides a fruitful

framework for the precise mathematical representation of complex neuronal networks. Using graph theoretical metrics, previous studies have linked
individual differences in intelligence to the global communication efficiency
of the human brain. Here, we investigate whether local connectivity metrics
can further elucidate the neural locus of the relationship between network
topology and individual differences in intelligence. Based on functional
magnetic resonance imaging data acquired during cognitive rest, individual functional brain networks were modeled as graphs for 54 healthy adult
participants (18 – 30 years; Nooner et al., 2012). Subsequently, metrics of
graph properties were correlated with intelligence (Wechsler Abbreviate
Scale of Intelligence, WASI, Wechsler, 1999). Consistent across different
sparsity thresholds applied to the modeled networks, brighter subjects
showed higher centrality in the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). Specifically, in more intelligent persons the right IFG is characterized by (i) higher
degree centrality, reflecting overall more direct connections to neighboring
nodes in the functional network, as well as by (ii) higher nodal efficiency
reflecting on average shorter connections from IFG to all other nodes of the
network. In sum, our data suggest that the topological integration of right
IFG in the cortical network is predictive of general intelligence. The role
of the rIFG in reconfiguring representations of currently relevant stimuli
and responses may be critical for its contribution to human intelligence,
and may be facilitated by easier access to greater portions of the cortical
network in more intelligent persons.

Poster Session F

F123
TASK-GENERAL AND TASK-SPECIFYING FUNCTIONAL BRAIN
DYNAMICS Doug Schultz1, Michael Cole1; 1Rutgers University - Newark — We

recently found that the human brain’s functional networks are similar but
not identical between rest and a variety of task states (Cole et al., 2014).
Here we sought to characterize these changes from rest, identifying the network dynamics that likely make adaptive, task-specific behavior possible.
Data from the Human Connectome Project (WU-Minn consortium, N=100)
was used for analysis. This involved 60 min of rest functional MRI (fMRI)
data, as well as 45 min of task fMRI data split among seven highly distinct
tasks (as previously described; Barch et al., 2013). We conducted a series
of analyses comparing functional connectivity across previously defined
brain regions and networks (Power et al., 2011). We compared functional
connectivity between each of the seven tasks and an equivalent period of
resting-state data. All tasks were characterized by prominent decreases in
connectivity relative to rest, primarily within networks. Surprisingly, connectivity between the visual and motor networks was also decreased, even
for visuo-motor working memory tasks. Follow-up analyses revealed that
these visuo-motor decreases were evident during all blocks of the working memory tasks, but that they were accompanied by small, but specific
increases in connectivity. These results indicate that task related changes in
connectivity may be largely negative, reflecting a large-scale suppression
of intrinsic connectivity along with a select set of task-specifying increases
in connectivity.

F124
MODULATION OF FRONTAL MIDLINE THETA DURING AUDITORY
PRESENTATION OF FICTIONAL AND NONFICTIONAL NARRATIVES
John Treffalls1, Brian Fremaux1, Hannah Wojciehowski2, Dan Lochman3, Reiko
Graham1; 1Department of Psychology, Texas State University, 2Department of
English, University of Texas at Austin, 3Department of English, Texas State University — Frontal midline theta (FMT) consists of 4-7 Hz oscillations over frontal

areas that are sensitive to task demands: increases in power have been associated with mental effort and attention, while decreases have been associated with activation of default mode network. The objective of the current study was to examine differences in FMT during different narratives
(fiction vs. nonfiction). To this end, we recorded EEG in participants (N =
15) while they while they listened to a nonfictional and a fictional narrative (eyes closed), and while resting with eyes closed. Overall, participants
rated the fictional narrative as more vivid and interesting than the nonfictional narrative. EEG analyses revealed an anterior-posterior gradient to
theta, which differed as a function of condition. Relative to the eyes closed
condition, FMT was enhanced for the nonfictional narrative. In contrast,
FMT for the fictional narrative was more similar to the eyes closed resting
condition. Exploratory correlational analyses revealed that FMT to the fictional narrative was negatively correlated with the ability to feel empathy
for characters in a story. In contrast, the importance of plot in a narrative
was inversely related to FMT for both narratives. Reader reactions to the
stories (e.g., vividness, interest) were not correlated with FMT. We hypothesize that increases in FMT during the nonfictional narrative were due, at
least in part, to mental effort (e.g., attention, cognitive load). Decreases in
FMT during the fictional narrative may be due to increased activity in the
default mode network due to increased mentalizing or self-referential processing.

F125
NUMERICAL ABILITIES DEVELOP INDEPENDENT OF VISUAL
EXPERIENCE Shipra Kanjlia1, Connor T. Lane1, Lisa Feigenson1, Marina
Bedny1; 1Johns Hopkins University — The ability to perform symbolic math

depends on the ability to process nonsymbolic numerical information in
the visual environment. Individual differences in the ability to visually estimate sets of items in infancy and childhood predict performance on future
math assessments (Mazzocco et al., 2011; Starr et al., 2014). Math tasks also
activate areas of the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) that respond to the numerosity of visual sets (Piazza et al., 2007). Given the link between visual numerical approximation and math abilities, we asked whether visual experience
is necessary for typical development of neural structures involved in symbolic math processing. While undergoing fMRI, congenitally blind and
sighted participants heard pairs of algebraic equations and determined

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

201

Poster Session F
whether the value of the unknown variable in each were the same. Half of
the equations were simple (single-digit e.g. X-2=5) and half were complex
(double-digit e.g. X-12=15). In a second task, participants judged whether
pairs of sentences had the same meaning. Half of the sentences were syntactically simple (subject-relative) and half were complex (object-relative). As
shown previously, we find greater activation in bilateral IPS for math calculation than sentence comprehension in sighted adults. Critically, bilateral
IPS in congenitally blind individuals 1) also respond more to math than sentences (group-by-condition ANOVAs main effect of math F(1,25)=194.85,
p<0.0001; group-by-condition interaction F(1,25)=1.90, p=0.18) 2) is sensitive to manipulations in math complexity (t(16)=-5.42, p<0.0001) and 3)
is not sensitive to differences in syntactic complexity (t(16)=-0.22,p=0.83).
Thus, visual experience is not necessary for the development of neural
structures supporting math calculation.

F126
INTERACTION BETWEEN BRAIN-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC
FACTOR VAL66MET GENOTYPE AND SEX AFFECTS HIPPOCAMPAL FUNCTION DURING SPATIAL NAVIGATION IN HEALTHY
ADULTS Hillary Raab1, Shau-Ming Wei1, Philip Kohn1, J. Shane Kippenhan1,
Bhaskar Kolachana2, Karen F. Berman1; 1Section on Integrative Neuroimaging,
Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Branch, NIMH, NIH, 2Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Branch, NIMH, NIH — While there is evidence of sex

differences in hippocampus-dependent spatial abilities, the literature in
humans is far from unanimous. Aside from methodological differences, a
number of yet-to-be-defined contextual, demographic, and genetic factors
might contribute to the observed variability in the findings. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), crucial for cellular function in the hippocampus, is one such potential factor. Because the Val66Met single nucleotide
polymorphism in the BDNF gene has been associated with abnormal hippocampal function during performance of affective and cognitive tasks,
and because animal studies have shown that BDNF and gonadal steroid
hormones conjointly influence function of hippocampal neurons, we used
fMRI together with a virtual reality-like hippocampus-dependent spatial
navigation task to test for sex-by-BDNF genotype interactions in 49 healthy
adults (age=32.36, 15 Met carriers). We found significant sex-by-genotype
interactions in the right hippocampus (p=.05, FWE with small volume correction): Val homozygotes showed greater hippocampal activation in men
than women, whereas in Met carriers the relationship between the sexes
was opposite. These data demonstrate that BDNF allelic variation and sex
interactively affect hippocampal function during spatial navigation. These
results extend to humans previous findings in animals showing interactions of estradiol and BDNF in the brain, and also offer an explanation for
the variable results noted in human studies. Future work will examine
whether BDNF genotype and menstrual-cycle-phase interactively affect
navigation-related hippocampal recruitment in women. Additionally,
analyses of functional connectivity between hippocampus and other brain
regions will elucidate circuit-level repercussions of BDNF genotype-by-sex
interactive effects on hippocampal function during spatial navigation.

F127
BECOMING CENTERED: META-ANALYSIS OF FMRI REVEALS LATERAL-MEDIAL TRANSITION BETWEEN NOVICES AND EXPERTS IN
MINDFULNESS Gina Falcone1, Matthew Jerram1; 1Suffolk University — Inter-

est in mindfulness has grown in the past decade, especially as mindfulness-based third-wave cognitive therapies have been found to be efficacious. This has encouraged imaging research into the brain mechanisms
of mindfulness. Researchers have tended to take one of two approaches to
these studies – either training individuals with no experience in mindfulness for the study or sampling individuals who are experienced or expert
in mindful meditation. Therefore, broad conclusions about the neural representation of mindfulness have confounded the processes of learning and
automaticity; we used meta-analysis to parse these processes. Meta-analysis was performed with GingerALE 2 using data extracted from published
studies examining mindfulness using fMRI. Studies for inclusion were
identified through keyword search (such as (“fMRI” AND “mindfulness”)).
Twenty studies were identified, of which twelve studies trained naïve individuals in mindfulness during the study (NEW) and 8 studies used experienced mindfulness meditators (EXPERT). Significant cluster peak voxels
and sample sizes were entered into GingerALE 2 and activation likelihood

202

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
estimate (ALE) maps were obtained. For NEW studies, meta-analysis
identified ALE clusters in amygdala, insula, inferior frontal gyrus, middle
temporal gyrus, and middle frontal gyrus. In the EXPERT studies, ALE
clusters were found in precuneus, posterior cingulate, medial frontal gyrus
and anterior cingulate. These results are consistent with previous research
demonstrating that learning is associated with more lateral brain activation and automaticity with more medial activity and provide information
about differences in mindfulness-related brain activity in naïve and expert
practitioners.

F128
REPRESENTATION OF SYMBOLIC FRACTIONS RECRUITS CIRCUITS TUNED TO NONSYMBOLIC RATIO MAGNITUDE. Mark Lewis1,2,
Elizabeth Toomarian2, Edward Hubbard2; 1University of Delaware, 2University of
Wisconsin-Madison — Both children and adults experience pervasive strug-

gles understanding fractions, leading some theorists to propose that fraction concepts might lack a cortical specialization analogous to the Approximate Number System. However, emerging data and theory suggest that
newly identified circuits – a Ratio Processing System (RPS) - may be ideally
suited for learning about fractions. We will present results from neuroimaging and behavioral experiments that suggest that an understanding of
symbolic fraction magnitude may build upon the ability of the RPS to represent the magnitudes of nonsymbolic ratios like pairs of lines. The results
of an fMRI adaptation experiment demonstrate cross-notational recovery from adaptation to nonsymbolic ratio magnitudes. After participants
(n=6) were adapted to a specific nonsymbolic ratio magnitude (a series of
line ratios in which the component line lengths varied but the shorter line
length was always the same fraction of the longer line), activation in right
mid-IPS recovered in a distance-dependent fashion when a new nonsymbolic ratio or corresponding symbolic fraction was presented. The fact that
adaptation transferred from nonsymbolic line ratios to symbolic fractions
in a distance-dependent manner suggests that adults have made links
between symbolic fractions and the more basic RPS that represents fraction magitude. Results from a two-alternative-forced-choice experiment in
which participants (n=40) chose the line ratio that matched a symbolic fraction showed that the precision of these links predicts fraction knowledge as
assesed by a symbolic fraction comparison task, suggesting that building
upon this system may be an important part of fraction learning.

F129
LACK OF REPLICATION FOR THE MYOSIN-18B ASSOCIATION
WITH MATHEMATICAL ABILITY IN INDEPENDENT COHORTS Samuelle Filea Fajutrao Valles1, Kerry Pettigrew1, Kristina Moll2,3, Kate Northstone4,
Susan Ring4, Craig Pennell5, Carol Wang5, Ruth Leavett3, Marianna E. Hayiou-Thomas3, Paul Thompson6, Nuala H. Simpson7, Simon E. Fisher8,9, Andrew
J.O. Whitehouse10, Margaret J. Snowling6,11, Dianne F. Newbury7,11, Silvia Paracchini1; 1School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, 2Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics, and Psychotherapy, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 3Department of Psychology, University of York, UK, 4School of
Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, 5School of Women’s and
Infants’ Health, University of Western Australia, 6Department of Experimental
Psychology, University of Oxford, 7Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
Oxford University, 8Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 9Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 10Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, 11St. Johns College, University of Oxford
— From shopping to telling the time, mathematical ability is an essential
skill for everyday life. Twin studies indicate that dyscalculia (or mathematical disability) is caused partly by a genetic component, which is yet to be
understood at the molecular level. Recently, a coding variant (rs133885)
in the Myosin-18B gene was shown to be associated with mathematical
abilities with a specific effect among children with dyslexia. This association represents one of the most significant genetic associations reported
to date for mathematical abilities. However, this association has not been
replicated before. We conducted association analysis in different cohorts
characterised with maths-related measures, with the aim of replicating the
rs133885 association. The study was conducted primarily using the Avon
Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC), which was ade-

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Session F

quately powered for this analysis. We tested additional cohorts including
the York Cohort, the Specific Language Impairment Consortium (SLIC) and
the Raine Cohort. In a total we analysed 4854 individuals that were stratified for a definition of dyslexia whenever possible. We did not observe any
associations between rs133885 in Myosin-18B and mathematical abilities
among individuals with dyslexia or in the general population. Our results
then suggest that the Myosin-18B variant is unlikely to be a main factor
contributing to mathematical abilities.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

203

Poster Session G
ATTENTION: Other
G1
FEATURE CORRELATION GUIDANCE IN CATEGORY VISUAL
SEARCH Rachel Wu1, Zoe Pruitt1, Megan Runkle1, Kristen Meyer1, Gaia Scerif2,
Richard Aslin1; 1Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester, 2Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford — Compared to objects

with uncorrelated features (e.g., jelly beans come in many colors), objects
with correlated features (e.g., bananas tend to be yellow) enable more
robust object representations (e.g., Austerweil & Griffiths, 2013; Wu et
al., 2011) and object categories (e.g., Younger & Cohen, 1986). It is unclear
whether these more robust representations resulting from feature correlations impact working memory representations (e.g., attentional templates).
Adults participated in four visual search tasks where targets were defined
as either one item (e.g., exemplar search: one alien with triangle-shaped
back spikes and a triangle belly shape), or categorically (e.g., category
search: any alien with matching vs non-matching back spikes and belly
shapes) with correlated (e.g., circle belly shape, circle back spikes) and
uncorrelated features (e.g., circle belly shape, triangle back spikes). We
measured behavioral responses and the N2pc component, an event-related
potential (ERP) marker of target selection. Both behavioral responses were
better and the N2pc was larger for exemplar search compared to category
search, and behavioral responses were worse for search for uncorrelated
than for correlated features. Importantly, the N2pc was present for category search with correlated features, while search for uncorrelated features
revealed no N2pc. There were no differences between the large N2pc components for exemplar search. Our ERP results demonstrate that correlated
features for novel categories provide a more robust category representation
compared to categories with uncorrelated features, which enables more
efficient category search.

G2
FUNCTIONAL COUPLING BETWEEN THE RIGHT ANTERIOR INSULA
AND OCCIPITAL ALPHA POWER DISTINGUISHES BETWEEN
DECISIONS TO ATTEND LEFT OR RIGHT: A COMBINED EEG FMRI
STUDY. Jesse Bengson1, Ron Mangun1; 1University of California-Davis — Experimental studies of visual spatial attention typically use instructional cues
to direct attention, but in everyday vision, attention is often directed by
endogenous decisions. Here, we employ a novel willed attention paradigm
along with Electroencephalographic and functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging recordings in order to investigate the neural processes that initiate
the control of decision-driven attention. With respect to the fMRI data, we
isolate a unique network of activation for willed attention that includes the
Anterior Cingulate, Middle Frontal Gyrus, and the Left and Right Anterior
Insula. We also isolate decision-specific reduction of occipital alpha power
over the visual cortex during the decision process. Finally, we find that coupling between the decision specific alpha reduction and BOLD activation in
the right anterior Insula uniquely differentiates between decisions to attend
left vs. right. Based on these data, we put forward a model whereby the
right anterior Insula is critical in mediating between visual-cortical sensitivity and the influence of this sensitivity upon the decision process.

G3
FLANKER-TASK INCONGRUENCY INDUCES RAPID ATTENTIONAL
DISTRACTION FOLLOWED BY CORRESPONDING SUPPRESSION
TO FACILITATE NEXT-TRIAL PERFORMANCE Berry van den Berg1,2,
Monicque Lorist2, Frank Lee1, Marty Woldorff1; 1Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, 2BCN Neuroimaging Center, University of
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands — Relatively little is understood concern-

ing the neural mechanisms, especially the underlying neural cascade, by
which humans can successfully modulate visual inputs to suppress irrelevant or conflicting stimulus information and thus improve behavioral
performance. Here, we used a novel lateralized flanker paradigm (e.g.,

204

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

congruent: HHHHH, bilateral incongruent: HHXHH, partial incongruent:
XXXHH), in combination with high-temporal-resolution EEG recordings,
to investigate the effects of conflicting visual input on both time-locked
ERPs and attention-related Alpha power (8-14 Hz). Results indicate: (1)
A rapid early ERP response elicited contralateral to the conflicting input
(200-400 ms), consistent with attentional capture by the incongruent information; (2) This was followed by a contralateral Alpha decrease (500-800
ms), also consistent with a shift of attention towards the incongruent information; (3) This contralateral Alpha decrease was followed in turn by a
bilateral occipital Alpha increase (1100-1500 ms) that was predictive of subsequent response-time performance (more Alpha predicted faster RTs); (4)
This was then followed towards the end of the trial (just before the next
trial), by a lateralized Alpha increase contralateral to the incongruent side
(1700-2500 ms). These results suggest a cascade of attention-related processes lasting over several seconds by which humans deal with conflicting
stimulus input. In particular, attention appears to be initially and rapidly
shifted toward incongruent information (contralateral ERP effect and alpha
decrease), which is followed by an alpha suppression of the information
that is irrelevant (alpha increases, bilateral and then contralateral), leading
in turn to better preparation for, and better performance on, the next trial.

G4
EXPLORING SOCIAL INFLUENCES ON ANTICIPATORY EEG ACTIVITY IN A CUED SPATIAL ATTENTION TASK Ashley R. Drew1, Peter J. Marshall1; 1Temple University — Various anticipatory changes in brain oscillations
emerge following a visual cue to direct one’s attention toward an upcoming target stimulus that requires a behavioral response. We attempted to
connect work in this area to the emerging field of joint action, in order to
fill a gap in the literature on social influences on selective attention. We
measured alpha desynchronization and ERP (specifically the late directing
attention positivity component; LDAP) patterns after participants viewed
cues that signaled whether they would respond to an impending target
or whether another person would respond to it. EEG was recorded from
undergraduates (N=23) who sat next to a partner (experimenter). An arrow
cue indicated the side of the screen the target would appear, with cue color
indicating whether 1) the participant or 2) the partner or 3) nobody was
to press a button determining whether the target was a short or long bar.
The instructed goal for the participant and partner was to jointly maximize
discrimination performance. Significantly greater alpha desynchronization
and larger LDAP amplitudes to the cues were found when the cues were
for the participant to respond, rather than the partner. There was no significant difference between alpha and LDAP responses to the cues indicating
that the partner should respond and the cues indicating that no response
was required from either person. This lack of difference may be partly due
to a lack of social connection between participant and partner, which could
be strengthened in future work relating selective attention and joint action.

G5
EFFICIENT TASK SWITCHING UNDERLIES OPTIMAL MULTITASKING PERFORMANCE Omar AlHashimi1, Ted Zanto2, Joaquin A. Anguera2,
Adam Gazzaley2; 1UCLA Department of Psychology, 2UCSF Department of Neurology — Performance deficits characterized by response delays and errors

often arise when multitasking. Dual-tasking experiments often use two
discrete tasks to characterize these costs. However, real-world interruption
often occurs while continuously engaging in a non-discrete task such as
driving or talking. We use NeuroRacer, a complex continuous task paradigm previously used to characterize age-related deficits and midline frontal theta training-related gains to characterize these multitasking costs. To
investigate, we focused our analysis on driving performance in isolation
and in the context of another task (discrimination) among naive participants
aged 20 to 29 years old. We examined individual variability differences
between overall task performance and midline frontal theta activity finding increased midline frontal theta activity in higher multitask performers.
Specifically, participants with higher theta activity during the interrupting

2015 Annual Meeting
discrimination task was found to correlate with faster disengagement of the
continuous driving task, improved discrimination performance and a faster
re-engagement of the driving task, resulting in decreased driving error.

G6
THE TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF ATTENTIONAL SHIFTING AND
FEEDBACK PROCESSING AFTER PARTIAL FEEDBACK ON THE
PROBABILITY OF REWARD Rene San Martin1,2, Joshua Stivers2, Marty
2 1

Woldorff ; Centro de Neuroeconomía, Facultad de Economía y Empresa, Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile, 2Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke
University — We used eventrelated potentials (ERPs) in a learning-based,
decision-making task to investigate the neural processing of partial-feedback information on the probability of reward and how such partial
information interacts with the processing of final feedback. On each trial
participants chose between a green and a purple circle, which were associated with asymmetric probabilities (60/40) of winning in that run, with
the direction of these “biased-coin” probabilities being reset each run. A
second ‘partial-feedback’ screen presented a circular array of 8 lateralized
circles, where the proportion of green versus purple circles indicated the
probability that the choice made was a winner. Each trial ended when one
of these lateralized circles turned into a feature-popout, providing the final
outcome of the trial. Partial feedback indicating 100% vs. 0% probability
of losing elicited the hallmark fronto-central feedback-related negativity
(FRN) peaking ~250ms. Moreover, both of these high-certainty initial-feedback conditions, versus low-certainty ones, were associated with a greater
attention-related P3 component (~350-500 ms). The final feedback event
elicited a robust N2pc component (~250ms) reflecting lateralized attentional
shifting towards the winner feedback stimulus. This N2pc was followed
by a relatively delayed FRN (by ~150ms) for losing versus winning bets,
suggesting the need for an attentional shift to the relevant, outcome-indicating, environmental item before full analysis of the bet outcome could be
realized. We also found that the final-outcome FRN and P3 components
were greatly attenuated after partial-feedback of 100% vs. <100% certainty,
indicating the influence of partial feedback information on the processing
of a final outcome.

G7
A MECHANISTIC MODEL OF ALPHA-INDUCED INFORMATION
SUPPRESSION Stefan Berteau1, Daniel Bullock1, Robert Sekuler2, Paul
Miller2; 1Boston University, 2Brandeis University — Alpha-induced information

suppression, the functional inhibition of a cortical region by alpha (8-14
Hz) oscillations, has been established through both correlative and causal
experiments. Despite the extensive body of experimental work, there are
no existing computational models of this functional inhibition. We introduce the first mechanistic, computational neural model of alpha information suppression. When the model’s thalamo-cortical system is driven at or
near its resonant frequency of 10Hz, the amplitude of thalamic oscillations
increases. This in turn transitions the cortical excitatory cells from occasional input-correlated bursts into periodic suprathreshold activity. The
activity then drives cortical inhibitory interneurons, creating “pulses” of
GABAergic inhibition like those proposed by Jensen and Mazaheri in 2010.
This alternating saturation and inhibition reduces the impact of any incoming signal on cortical excitatory population activity. Our model’s results
show a significant reduction in communication, measured by mutual information, in the alpha range but not in the range of cortical theta (4-7 Hz).
This mirrors transcranial magnetic stimulation results which found suppression of sensory input only when the cortex was stimulated at alpha frequencies, not lower or higher. We also replicate EEG and behavioral results
from Busch et al., 2009, showing significant phase effects in low alpha/
high theta and supporting Klimesch’s 2007 Inhibition Timing Hypothesis.
Finally, extending the model to mimic coherence-based functional network
studies, we examine the role that coherence and relative phase play in communication between two modeled cortical regions. We demonstrate their
important role at theta frequencies, but (due to information suppression)
not in alpha.

Poster Session G

ATTENTION: Spatial
G8
ERP CORRELATES OF TACTILE SEARCH: THE N140CC Alexander
Jones1, Bettina Forster2; 1Middlesex University London, 2City University London
— Our brain constantly receives tactile information coming from the body’s
surface. We often only become aware of this information when directing
our attention towards the body. Here, we report a study investigating the
behavioural and neural response when selecting a target amongst distractor vibrations presented simultaneously to several location either across the
hands or body. Comparable studies in the visual modality have revealed the
N2pc as the neural correlate of visual selective attention. Analogously, we
describe an enhanced contralateral negativity which reaches a maximum
around 220 ms after stimuli onset. This negativity is strongest over central
electrodes close to and over somatosensory areas and lasts for around 200
ms from the onset of the somatosensory N140 ERP component. Based on
these characteristics we named this electrophysiological signature of attentional tactile target selection the N140-central-contralateral (N140cc). Furthermore, this component appears to reflect mainly attentional selection of
target locations rather than suppression of distractors as it was not reliably
altered by distractor location but by target location. Taken together, our
findings present a novel electrophysiological marker and show that attentional selection of touch operates mainly by enhancement of task relevant
locations within the somatosensory homunculus allowing to track the allocation of attention between limbs.

G9
MEAN SIZE OF STIMULI IN VISUAL SEARCH GUIDES SPATIAL
ATTENTION Suhyon Ahn1, Eunhee Ji1, Yu-Jin Choi1, Kyung-Min Lee1, Min-Shik
Kim1; 1Yonsei University — Does the mean total size of the stimuli within a
visual search display affect the speed with which an individual finds the
target’s location? In this experiment, subjects were trained to search for a
target (a black circle with a gap), among arrays of distractors (closed black
circles), both varying sizes within a subset. Sets of eight circles, varying
sizes with equal interval were used as stimuli. Within a set, four circles
ordered in the middle (the 3rd to the 6th) were considered as a subset and
the 1st, 2nd, 7th and 8th circles as another subset. Both subsets in a set were
identical in mean size of stimuli, but differed in variance and individual
sizes. The target location was linked to the mean total size of the stimuli
while the distractors were located randomly across trial. After training,
subjects were tested on four conditions, where the target either appeared
in the original “old” location (as trained) or a “new” location, and where
the sizes of the circles were either the “same” (as trained) or “different”. We
found that response times for the OLD condition where the target appeared
on the same location faster than in the NEW condition where the target
appeared in the new location, regardless of whether the sizes of the stimuli
were same or different. This finding suggests that the mean total size of
stimuli in a visual search display could be linked to a specific location and
could guide spatial attention as a contextual cue.

G10
NEURAL SUBSTRATES OF VOLUNTARY SELECTION IN TOPDOWN SELECTIVE ATTENTION Yuelu Liu1, Chun-Jui Chen1, Jesse J. Bengson1, Xiangfei Hong1,2, Jane-Ling Wang1, Mingzhou Ding3, George R. Mangun1;
1
University of California, Davis, 2Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3University of Florida — An important aspect of top-down attentional control is the voluntary

selection of behaviorally-relevant information according to one’s goals and
expectations. While studies utilizing explicit cues to examine attentional
control mechanisms have identified structures within the dorsal frontoparietal cortex in the maintenance of top-down attentional influence, the
neural substrates underlying the voluntary selection process remain relatively unexplored. We addressed this issue by applying multi-voxel pattern analysis on blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity measured
during a willed attention task, where visual symbolic cues either allowed
participants to spontaneously select a spatial location to apply covert attention (choice cues) or explicitly instructed them to attend to the cued locations (instructional cues). Following choice cues, we found that besides
regions in the dorsal frontoparietal attention network, BOLD activities in
extensive areas within the midline frontal and parietal cortex, frontopolar

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

205

Poster Session G

2015 Annual Meeting

cortex, lateral frontal cortex, and temporal cortex predicted participants’
intentions about which spatial location to attend. Among these regions, the
decoding accuracy in dorsoanterior cingulate cortex, pre-supplementary
motor area, precuneus, bilateral anterior insula, left middle frontal gyrus,
and right frontopolar cortex was significantly higher during willed attention than during explicitly-cued attention. In addition, enhanced decoding
accuracy was further observed in the dorsal frontoparietal attention network for willed attention, including bilateral frontal-eye field and regions
in the anterior intraparietal sulcus. Our results suggest that the process of
voluntary selection is functionally segregated from attentional control and
involves extensive regions other than those within the frontoparietal attention network.

G11
INTER-AREAL ALPHA-BAND SYNCHRONY IS MODULATED BY
SELECTIVE SPATIAL VISUAL ATTENTION Muriel Lobier1,2, J Matias
Palva1, Satu Palva1; 1Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, Finland,
BioMag laboratory, HUS Medical Imaging Center, Helsinki University Central
Hospital — Spatial selective visual attention is classically associated with
2

alpha-band power suppression contralateral to the attended hemifield in
sensory cortex. Little is known, however, of the putative cortex-wide, systems-level neuronal mechanisms associated with the allocation of visual
selective attention. To investigate the role of large-scale neuronal synchronization in coordinating spatial attention, we recorded magnetoencephalography (MEG) while participants carried out a Posner-like spatially cued
stimuli detection/discrimination task. Participants were cued to covertly
attend to the left or right hemifield using a central cue. We used cortically-constrained minimum-norm estimates and individual surface source
models to reconstruct the source time series of cortical parcels (400). Phase
and amplitude time series were extracted for each parcel using Morlet
wavelets for frequencies from 3 to 40 Hz. We characterized cortex-wide
inter-areal phase interactions by computing the phase locking value (PLV)
and weighed phase lag index (wPLI) for each source parcel pair. We then
tested for modulations of oscillation amplitude and of phase synchrony
patterns in overlapping 400 ms time-windows covering the first post-cue
second using a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test. All statistical analyses were
(FDR) corrected for multiple comparisons. Spatial visual selective attention
was associated with alpha-band suppression in contralateral compared to
ipsilateral visual cortex. In addition, it was correlated with strengthened
theta (5-7 Hz) and alpha (8-13 Hz) band cortex-wide synchrony, of which
anatomical patterns were modulated by the cued hemifield. These data
support the hypothesis of inter-areal alpha synchronization as a mechanism supporting the allocation of visual attention.

G12
TONIC AND RETINOTOPICALLY-ORGANIZED ALPHA-BAND MODULATIONS BY VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION María Melcón1, Isabelle
1

2

1

1

Duplan , Santiago Fernández-González , Almudena Capilla ; Universidad
Autonoma de Madrid, 2Universidad Complutense de Madrid — Alpha-band

(8-14 Hz) power is typically modulated by visuospatial attention. This
modulation is lateralized with respect to the locus of attention, i.e. alpha
power is reduced in parieto-occipital sites contralateral to the cued location. Given that alpha-band suppression is thought to be originated in
extrastriate visual cortex, we aimed to investigate whether alpha-band
attentional modulations are retinotopically mapped. To address this issue,
we conducted an electroencephalography (EEG) experiment with 59 channels, while participants performed a visuospatial cued detection task. They
were instructed to pay covert attention to one out of 60 sectors of the visual
field, as indicated by a 100% valid cue (attention condition; in the control
condition the cue was 0% valid). Both, the attention and the control condition were presented in a block design. Our results show a marginal effect
of retinotopic alpha-band organization. This effect was masked by a more
prominent tonic difference between conditions starting before cue presentation (-200 to 100 ms with respect to cue onset) over right parieto-occipital
electrodes. This tonic suppression in alpha-band power might represent a
general, right lateralized alert mechanism for the deployment of attention,
rather than a retinotopically organized expectancy mechanism. The precedence of the tonic mechanism over the retinotopic one in this experiment
is likely due to the use of blocks in the experimental design. More studies
employing event-related designs would be necessary to elucidate to what

206

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

extent attentional modulations of alpha-band oscillations are retinotopically organized. [Funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiviness, MINECO, PSI2012-34558]

G13
SEX DIFFERENCES IN PERFORMANCE AND STRATEGY SELECTION DURING EXECUTION OF A REAL WORLD NAVIGATION TASK
Mashal Fida1, Erin.L Zelinski1, Iasmim Montechiare1, Robert.J Sutherland1;
1
Canadian Centre of Behavioural Neuroscience, University of Lethbridge — Sex

differences in spatial abilities have been reported in many mammalian species, including humans. The Morris Water Task (MWT) is an often-used
behavioural assay of spatial ability in rodents that has been adapted to use
in humans, typically as virtual reality or tabletop versions. Such variations
have lead some to theorize that males and females implement different
strategies to solve spatial problems. On average, men tend to use cardinal
directions or environmental geometry, whereas women tend to use landmarks to solve these tasks. However, it could be the case that peri-personal
tasks recruit different neural regions than would be engaged during largescale, real-world traversals. Thus, we developed a dry-land version of the
MWT wherein subjects were required to traverse a circular, outdoor area
(diameter: 20-meters). We hypothesized that men and women (aged 19-25)
would implement different strategies to solve the task. Forty-three subjects
(27 women) were asked to locate a single, hidden target location over several trials with varying start locations. Both sexes reached the same level
of performance by the end of training, but results implied that men and
women use, as a default, allocentric and egocentric strategies, respectively.
A second group of women performed the task, but the starting location
remained constant for the first and second trials. In the second condition,
women proceeded directly to the platform location on the second trial.
Together, these results indicate that although men and women can both
solve spatial tasks, the default strategy is allocentric for men and egocentric
for women.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition
interactions
G14
THE BRAIN ACTIVATION ON THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE IN DISCRIMINATING FACES ALONG THE MORPHED CONTINUUM OF
HAPPY AND FEARFUL EXPRESSIONS Shih-Tseng T. Huang1, Ming-Chun
Lee2; 1Department of Psychology, National Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan,
Center for research in Cognitive Science, National Chung-Cheng University,
Taiwan — The present study used ERP to investigate the advantage of
2

between- categorical differences compared with within-categorical facial
expressions. Twenty-nine participants (15 males and 14 females, mean
range from 19 to 24) with normal or corrected normal vision participated.
In the study, two morphed faces made of a happy and fearful face were
presented in sequence in one of the same, or between-category conditions.
There were 288 trials including 144 same pairs, 72 within pairs, and 72
between pairs. The results found the P120 and N170 of second faces were
higher than those of the first faces on PO8. Higher p120 was found on PO8
than on PO7 and, similarly, higher on O2 than O1 suggesting greater activation on the right hemisphere. Both mean amplitudes (MAs) of P300-500
at the Cz and Pz found higher in the Between condition than those in the
Same and Within conditions. The MAs of p300-500 was found higher at P4
than at P3 as well as higher at O2 than at O1 in the Between condition than
those in the Same and Within conditions. Results suggested that activations at right hemisphere were higher than the left in processing faces and
activation in occipital and parietal lobes appears to be related to emotional
perceptual categorization.

G15
LARGE-SCALE NETWORK INTERACTIONS IN REGULATING THE
IMPACT OF INTERNAL EMOTIONAL DISTRACTION ON WORKING
MEMORY Alexandru D. Iordan1, Sanda Dolcos1, Florin Dolcos1; 1University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Emotional distracters may originate not only
in the external world but also in the internal environment, and clinical evi-

2015 Annual Meeting
dence suggests that distressing memories or thoughts that occur during
rumination may act as powerful internal distracters. However, the neural
mechanisms by which internal emotional distraction affects cognitive processing and the consequences of its on-line regulation on concurrent cognitive performance are not known. These issues were investigated using a
working memory (WM) task with cues for negative autobiographical memories used as internal distraction. Regulation was manipulated by instructing participants to focus on or away from the emotional aspects of their
memories. Behavioral results from 29 subjects showed that focusing away
from emotion was associated with increased WM performance, compared
with focusing on emotion. Consistent with the behavioral results, fMRI
analyses (17 subjects) showed reduced activity in brain regions associated
with the salience network (amygdala, anterior insula, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate cortex) when subjects were focusing
away from emotion, in the context of a similar impact of internal distraction
on executive parietal regions, irrespective of focus. Finally, functional connectivity analyses showed increased coupling between brain regions part
of the default-mode and salience networks when subjects were focusing
on emotion, indicating a potential neural mechanism by which internal
emotional distraction impairs on-line cognitive processing. These findings
demonstrate that focusing away from the emotional aspects of internal distracters is an effective regulation strategy and that the impact of internal
emotional distraction is linked to changes in the interactions between largescale functional brain networks.

G16
MODULATION OF AFFECTIVE INTERFERENCE DURING WORKING
MEMORY Madison L. Stroup1, Jenny Liu2, Tracy S. Nolan2, Seong K. Mun3,
David A.S. Kaufman1, Linda J. Larson-Prior2; 1Saint Louis University, St. Louis,
MO, 2Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 3Arlington Innovation Center, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Arlington, VA —
Goal-directed behavior requires two competing forms of mental control:
the ability to maintain goals over time despite distraction and the ability to
flexibly switch between goals with updates from working memory. Affective interference has been shown to disrupt the maintenance and flexibility of higher-order cognitive processes, with the greatest effects typically
observed for negatively valenced distracters. However, little is known
about factors that may modulate the impact of affective interference on
executive functions. The current study investigated whether psychological state modulated the effects of affective interference on the maintenance
of task-relevant representations in working memory. Twenty-three participants completed low and high load conditions of a working memory
task in which faces with neutral emotional expressions were presented
with intermittent neutral and negative interfering pictures. Behaviorally,
results indicated that negatively valenced distracters were associated with
significantly slower reaction times and lower accuracy. Participants also
completed questionnaires assessing aspects of psychological state (e.g.
mood, anxiety, and sleep), and results indicated that better functioning was
associated with a greater effect of negative distracters on task performance.
In order to explore the neural correlates of these effects, fMRI was acquired
on an additional five participants. Results of preliminary fixed-effects analyses suggest greater recruitment of visual attention networks following
negative interference relative to neutral or no interference. Taken together,
these findings are consistent with previous research suggesting that positive mood biases cognitive processes towards more flexible, but also more
distractible, behavior.

G17
SUSTAINED AND TRANSIENT REWARD EFFECTS ON COGNITIVE
CONTROL IN SCHIZOPHRENIA: THE RELEVANCE OF NEGATIVE
SYMPTOMS Yu Sun Chung1, Deanna Barch2; 1Department of Psychology,
Northwestern University, 2Department of Psychology, Psychiatry, and Radiology,
Washington University in St.Louis — Schizophrenia (SCZ) has been character-

ized by a core deficit of non-emotional context processing (i.e., the ability
to maintain context information necessary to regulate upcoming behavioral response towards goal-directed behavior), thought to be supported
by the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (e.g., (Cohen, Barch, Carter,
& Servan-Schreiber, 1999). Recent evidence from both animal and healthy
human neuroimaging work suggests that the DLPFC plays a crucial role
in representing and integrating reward-related context information. How-

Poster Session G
ever, it has been unknown whether individuals with SCZ can represent
and integrate reward-related contextual information to modulate cognitive
control. Thirty-six individuals with SCZ and twenty-seven healthy controls performed a response conflict task developed by Padmala et al. (2011)
during scanning. The job of participants was to categorize images as either
houses or buildings with either congruent or incongruent overlaid words.
First, participants performed no-reward baseline conditions, followed by
reward conditions with monetary incentives on some cued trials (reward
cues) for fast and correct responses. Using a state-item fMRI design, we
examined both sustained context-dependent and transient cue-related
effects of rewards on cognitive control. Contrary to our prediction, individuals with SCZ showed an intact pattern of increased sustained activity during reward contexts in the bilateral DLPFC at a group level. However, individual difference analyses revealed that more increased transient
cue-related DLPFC activity during rewarded versus no-rewarded trials
was associated with lower amotivation scores. These results suggest that
patients’ motivational impairments are related to DLPFC function in motivationally salient situations.

G18
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY OF BRAIN LESIONS HELPS EXPLAIN
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN COMPLEX DECISION-MAKING Matthew J Sutterer1, Tara Slade1, Joel Bruss1, Michelle W Voss1, Antoine Bechara2,
Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa, 2University of Southern California — Studies

of patients with brain damage have highlighted the necessity of limbic
and prefrontal areas for adaptive decision-making. However, patients
with damage outside these regions sometimes demonstrate impaired decision-making, and it remains unclear how this might be explained. These
cases have widely varying patterns of damage, preventing parsimonious
lesion-deficit explanations. Here we examined patients with focal damage
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), amygdala, or areas outside these
regions. We used each patient’s lesion mask as a separate region-of-interest seed for resting-state functional connectivity in 198 healthy subjects to
characterize typical patterns of functional connectivity with each lesion
location. We examined the overlap of these “lesion-derived networks” in
groups of patients classified as “impaired” or “unimpaired” on the Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT). Lesion-derived networks from the IGT-impaired
patients with vmPFC and amygdala damage showed connectivity with
default mode areas (inferior parietal lobule, posterior cingulate, and anterior insula). In contrast, connectivity networks derived from the impaired
patients with damage outside vmPFC and amygdala showed functional
connections with attention areas (intraparietal sulcus, precentral gyrus,
middle temporal areas, and insula). Lesion-derived networks from IGT
unimpaired amygdala and vmPFC patients showed connectivity with
the posterior insula, hippocampus, and temporal pole while connectivity
derived from lesions outside these areas showed connections with default
mode areas. We also observed distinct cognitive profiles for patients with
lesion-derived connectivity including attention networks compared to
affective and executive areas. Healthy connectivity profiles of brain lesions
have potential to shed new light on patients with otherwise idiosyncratic
patterns of damage and deficits.

G19
RETRIEVAL OF NEUTRAL SCENES PRESENTED WITH NEGATIVE
RELATIVE TO NEUTRAL CONTENT DURING ENCODING ELICITS
GREATER VISUAL ACTIVITY AFTER SLEEP Kelly Bennion1, Jessica
Payne2, Elizabeth Kensinger1; 1Boston College, 2The University of Notre Dame —
While research has investigated how sleep affects emotional memory and
how emotion enhances visual processing, these questions are typically
asked using an emotional cue (i.e., a negative object within a scene). To
our knowledge, no prior study has investigated how the effects of sleep
on retrieval of a neutral stimulus differ depending on if the neutral stimulus was presented with emotional versus non-emotional content during
encoding. In the present study, participants encoded scenes composed of
a negative or neutral object on a neutral background either in the morning
(preceding 12 hours awake; Wake group) or evening (preceding 12 hours
including a night of sleep; Sleep group). At retrieval, during fMRI, participants viewed the objects and backgrounds separately, distinguishing
new objects and backgrounds from studied ones. Many occipital regions
(lingual gyrus, middle occipital gyrus, inferior occipital gyrus) were more

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

207

Poster Session G
active within the Sleep group than Wake group during the successful
retrieval of neutral backgrounds that had been paired with negative (but
not neutral) objects during encoding. Further, REM sleep correlated with
activity in the lingual gyrus, middle occipital gyrus, and cuneus during the
successful retrieval of neutral backgrounds previously paired with negative objects. This builds upon prior work showing that emotion enhances
perceptual processing by demonstrating that emotion effects persist even
once the emotional element of the scene has been removed. The results
further suggest that the ability for emotion to enhance perceptual processing may be maximized by REM sleep, leading to enhanced visual activity
during successful retrieval.

G20
AFFECTIVE FLANKER TASK REVEALS DIFFERENCES IN THE
ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITY BETWEEN ADOLESCENTS AND
ADULTS Rebecca Reed1, Jill Grose-Fifer1,2; 1The Graduate Center, CUNY, 2John
Jay College of Criminal Justice, CUNY — Neurobiological evidence suggests

that adolescents may be less able to self-regulate in situations where decisions are made in an emotionally aroused state. It has been theorized that
subcortical areas that mediate emotional responses develop more rapidly
than prefrontal cortical control areas. In this study, we used event-related
potentials (ERPs) to examine response monitoring and error detection in
adolescents. We hypothesized that immaturities in the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) would result in adolescents being less able than adults to
ignore distractors. We compared amplitude differences in the error-related
negativity (ERN), which is thought to be generated in the ACC, in adults
(25-35 years) and adolescents (15-17 years) in an emotional face flanker and
a traditional letter flanker task. The results showed age-related differences
in the ERN in the face task; errors elicited larger ERNs in adults than in adolescents. When errors were made, congruent stimuli elicited larger ERNs
than incongruent stimuli. There was a stimulus by congruency interaction
such that fearful distractors elicited a smaller ERN than happy distractors. There were no significant age-related differences in ERN amplitude
for letter stimuli, These data demonstrate that adolescents are less able to
self-regulate in cognitively “hot” situations and offer further support for
current neurobiological models of adolescent brain development.

G21
ENHANCED NEURAL PROCESSING OF EMOTIONAL STIMULI IN
LATE ADOLESCENCE VS ADULTHOOD Lesa Ellis1, Benjamin Cohen1,
Chrono Nu1, Hannah Zweifel1, Rachel Westmoreland1, Russell Costa1; 1Westminster College, Salt Lake City, Utah — Emotional Stroop tasks are frequently

used to examine interference effects resulting from presentation of negative
vs. neutral stimuli, measured via longer reaction times. This interference is
thought to reflect an inability to disengage attention from negative stimuli, associated with higher levels of anxiety. However, additional studies
have reported that many individuals display shorter reaction times to
emotional stimuli vs. neutral, suggesting a facilitation rather than interference effect. Event Related Potential (ERP) studies of Emotional Stroop
tasks have reported enhanced Early Posterior Negativity (EPN) effects for
emotional vs. neutral stimuli, suggesting automaticity of processing of
emotional stimuli. Adolescents have comparative overactivation of reward
and threat detection pathways and display heightened emotional sensitivity and reactivity when compared to adults. Therefore, we suspected that
previous work in our lab confirming facilitation and enhanced EPN effects
to emotional stimuli in a late adolescent sample may only be a representation of a transient behavior unique to the adolescent phase. The present
study investigated comparisons between late adolescent (n=41) and adult
samples (n=28) in ERP and facilitation effects via the use of an Emotional
and Counting Stroop Task. Both groups showed significantly greater EPN
negative deflections to emotional stimuli (both negative and positive) compared to neutral stimuli. No group differences were found. However, the
late adolescent group showed significantly faster reaction times for emotional (both negative and positive) words vs neutral words. This difference
was not observed in the adult group, suggesting developmental changes in
processing of emotional stimuli that are not reflected in EPN activity.

208

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

G22
FUNCTIONAL DEFICIT IN PREFRONTAL CORTEX ASSOCIATED
WITH EMOTION REGULATION IMPAIRMENT IN PREMENSTRUAL
DYSPHORIC DISORDER Nicole Petersen1, Andrea Rapkin1, Dara Ghahremani1, Letty Liang1, Linda Goldman1, Edythe London1; 1UCLA — Premenstrual
Dysphoric Disorder (PMDD) afflicts 2 to 5% of women during their reproductive years, and is characterized by decreases in quality of life similar to
those observed in major depressive disorder. PMDD has been relatively
understudied, and the neurobiology that underlies its symptoms remains
obscure. We hypothesized that differences in the neural circuitry that supports emotion regulation may contribute to the negative mood symptoms
experienced by women with PMDD. We used a well-validated emotion
regulation task while collecting functional imaging data to investigate differences in emotion regulation in women with PMDD compared to healthy
controls, both in terms of behavior and brain activity. Consistent with our
hypothesis, preliminary data analysis has shown that women with PMDD
are less successful at emotion regulation using cognitive reappraisal of
negative emotions. Further, as reported previously, reappraisal success in
healthy controls was predicted by activity in the right prefrontal cortex. By
contrast, activity in the same region failed to predict reappraisal success in
women with PMDD, suggesting that dysfunction in this region of the brain
may be causally related to the mood dysregulation experienced by women
with PMDD. Findings from this study may aid in explaining the etiology
of PMDD and perhaps provide biomarkers for assessing behavioral and
pharmacological interventions to ameliorate this disorder.

G23
AN ERP STUDY OF THE GENDER DIFFERENCES IN FRONTAL
BRAIN ACTIVATIONS IN PROCESSING FACE AND VOICE MingChun Lee1, Shih-tseng Tina Huang2; 1Department of Psychology, National ChungCheng University, Taiwan, 2Center for research in Cognitive Science, National
Chung-Cheng University, Taiwan — The present study used ERP to investigate
the brain activations in processing acoustic emotional prosody and facial
expression. Twenty young adults participated. Congruous and incongruous faces and voices of angry and sad emotion were presented. In a congruous angry (or sad) pair, an angry (or sad) face was presented with an
angry (or sad) tone. The incongruous angry pairs contained an angry face
presented with a sad tone, or a sad face with an angry tone. Similarly, the
incongruous sad pairs contained sad face with neutral tone or neutral face
with sad tone. In the event-related potential procedure, congruous emotional pairs were presented in 85% and the incongruous pairs were in 15%
of the trials. The results found the latency of P120 and N170 were greater
at Pz than at Fz and Cz. Results also found higher mean amplitudes (MAs)
of P300-500 on sad than on angry pairs. Similarly, the MAs at F3 and F4
found greater on sad than on angry pairs. It was also found a significant
interaction of emotion and sex on P3 at F3 and F4, suggesting male participants performed higher activation on the sad pairs than on the angry pairs.
However, there was no significant difference in MAs of 300-500 or of p500800 at F7 and F8. The results suggested a greater activation at the parietal
lobe at the initial phase and male tended to perform higher activation in the
integration of sad pairs of face and tone than angry pairs.

G24
ENTERTAINMENT NEWS REDUCES SUBJECTIVE AND NEURAL
SENSITIVITY TO SOCIO-MORAL ISSUES: AN FMRI STUDY Shin Ah
Kim1, Yoo Min Lee1, Dong Wook Yook1, Sang Hee Kim*1; 1Korea University — As

more entertaining forms of news media have been on the rise, attention has
been paid to the potential adverse influence of entertaining news on the
viewers’ attitude formation. We investigated whether individuals’ subjective and neural sensitivity to socio-moral issues differ depending on news
delivery context. Twenty-two college students participated in this fMRI
study. Inside the scanner, participants viewed video clips of a news reporter’s coverage of current social events with moral violation, which was preceded by introductory comments either by the traditional news anchors
(traditional condition) or by the entertainment news anchors (entertainment condition). News reports of emotional issues were also included to
serve as the control condition. At the end of viewing each video clip of
news report, participants rated emotional arousal and moral permissibility
in relation to each issue. Outside the scanner, participants also rated neg-

2015 Annual Meeting
ative social impact that each issue may have. Brain images were analyzed
using SPM8. Participants reported greater negative social impact for the
issues introduced by traditional anchors as compared with those by entertainment news anchors. Regions of Interest (ROI) analyses indicated that
activities in the right TPJ and right STS in responses to socio-moral issues
were reduced in the entertainment condition relative to traditional news
condition. Furthermore, the degree of activity reduction in the dorsal ACC
in the entertainment news condition was associated with reduced ratings of
negative social impact. These results provide evidence that entertainment
news may alter viewers’ attitude toward socio-moral issues by weakening
moral reasoning scrutiny.

G25
EMOTIONAL CONGRUENCY OF MUSIC AFFECTS NEURAL PROCESSING OF SUSPENSEFUL FILM EXCERPTS Matthew Bezdek1, William Wenzel2, Nicole Martin1, Eric Schumacher1; 1Georgia Institute of Technology,
Stony Brook University — According to the theory of narrative transportation,

2

engaging films can, at times, suppress attention to the physical environment
beyond the film. In previous fMRI work, we have shown that moments of
rising narrative suspense are marked by a decrease in BOLD response in
regions that process the peripheral visual field. Here, we extend that work
by examining how aspects of film modulate this process. We manipulated
the soundtracks of suspenseful film excerpts to contain either congruent,
incongruent, or no music. Participants viewed excerpts of each music type
while fMRI volumes were recorded. Following the scanning session, participants completed a surprise recall test for film content. Planned contrasts
of BOLD response to increases in suspense revealed that congruent music
produced increased activity in visual processing areas when compared to
incongruent or no music conditions. Participants also showed more accurate recall for events that occurred during periods of increased suspense
than periods of decreasing suspense. Film events that were subsequently
recalled, compared to events that were not correctly recalled, produced
increased activity in regions including the parahippocampal gyrus. These
findings reveal how filmic elements can influence the neural response to
suspenseful film excerpts and deepen our understanding of how emotional
congruency can affect visual attention and memory using naturalistic stimuli.

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional
responding
G26
DISTINGUISHING AROUSAL-BIASED COMPETITION OF VISUAL
PERCEPTION IN YOUNG AND OLDER ADULTS Tae-Ho Lee1, Steven G.
Greening1, Allison Ponzio1, Mara Mather1; 1University of Southern California —
The arousal-biased competition (ABC) model predicts that arousal biases
processing in favor of high priority stimuli and against low priority stimuli
(Mather & Sutherland, 2011). Support for the model comes from studies
of young adults (e.g., Lee et al, 2014). However, due to declines in attentional selectivity (Schmitz et al., 2010), older adults may show weaker and
less specific perceptual selection under arousal than younger adults. To test
this, in the main detection task of this fMRI study, we presented place-object image pairs as simultaneous target and distracter stimuli after either a
fear-conditioned arousing tone or a neutral tone. The target was more visually salient than the distractor. Participants identified the location of the
target. The arousal-by-saliency interaction differed depending on the age
group. In young adults, when the place image was salient, parahippocampal place area (PPA) activity was enhanced by a preceding arousing tone. In
contrast, when the place was the distracter, arousal reduced PPA activity.
Conversely, older adults exhibited a generalized arousal-induced visual
enhancement in PPA, regardless of whether the place image was the target
or distracter. The current results indicate that arousal increases processing
selectivity for younger, but not older adults,. In the older adults, arousal
enhanced sensory processing regardless of stimulus priority. These data
suggest that arousal-biased competition relies on mechanisms of attention
selection which deteriorate with age.

Poster Session G

G27
NEURAL IMPACT OF TASK-IRRELEVANT DISORDER-RELATED
STIMULI IN PATIENTS WITH PANIC DISORDER Katharina Feldker1,
Carina Yvonne Heitmann1, Paula Neumeister1, Thomas Straube1; 1Institute of
Medical Psychology and Systems Neuroscience, University of Muenster — Unex-

pected, recurrent panic attacks and anxious apprehension are two distinct
emotional phenomena that constitute the core symptoms for diagnosing
panic disorder (PD). PD patients show increased interoceptive sensitivity in
response to a wide range of threat stimuli. While previous investigations in
PD patients have focused on generally threat-related stimuli, we developed
a standardized set of complex disorder-related scenes, e.g. a person fainting
in public, which induced anxiety in PD. It is as yet unknown to what extent
complex disorder-related visual stimuli which are not relevant to task-solving are processed on the neural level in PD. The present study investigated
neural responses to emotional task-irrelevant stimuli which were simultaneously presented with geometric visual objects which participants were
asked to compare. PD patients in contrast to healthy controls (HC) showed
hyperactivation in limbic areas in response to panic-related versus neutral
pictures. The effect was most pronounced in the insula. Since insula activation has previously been linked to the representation of bodily states, insular hyperactivation is consistent with increased interoceptive sensitivity to
threat in PD patients, and likely plays a pivotal role in the etiology and
maintenance of the disorder. The present results provide evidence that the
newly developed set of panic-related scene pictures is suited to elicit hyperactivation in limbic areas in PD patients even when the stimuli do not have
to be attended to. This may suggest brain mechanisms related to automatic
distraction by disorder-related visual stimuli in PD.

G28
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF PROCESSING
COMPLEX DISORDER-RELATED VISUAL SCENES IN SOCIAL
ANXIETY DISORDER Carina Yvonne Heitmann1, Katharina Feldker1, Paula
Neumeister1, Thomas Straube1; 1Institute of Medical Psychology and Systems
Neuroscience, University of Muenster — Several studies have investigated the

neural underpinnings of social anxiety and social anxiety disorder (SAD)
using fearful and harsh faces as emotional stimuli. Unfortunately, there is
a lack of studies on the processing of more ecologically valid disorder-related visual stimuli such as scenes of persons being the center of attention,
e.g. giving a speech. Therefore, we have created a standardized set of fifty
complex visual scenes depicting situations which elicit social anxiety in
SAD patients, and fifty control pictures. SAD patients compared to healthy
controls (HC) rated the pictures as more unpleasant and arousing, and
reported greater anxiety. Furthermore, neural correlates of processing these
disorder-related scenes were investigated using an emotion-unrelated
detection task and functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI). FMRI
results showed limbic hyperactivation, especially in the bilateral insula, in
SAD patients versus HC to disorder-related compared to neutral scenes,
which is in line with previous studies reporting insular hyperactivation in
SAD. The insula is associated with interoceptive awareness, a core characteristic of SAD in response to social threat. Thus, using a new set of visual
social threat scenes which induced social anxiety in SAD, we reveal crucial
involvement of the insula in the processing of this class of stimuli in SAD.

G29
IDENTIFICATION OF AFFECTIVE STATES FROM AUDIOVISUAL
STIMULI BASED ON FMRI DATA Jongwan Kim1, Douglas Wedell1, Svetlana
Shinkareva1; 1University of South Carolina — There is converging evidence that
people rapidly and automatically encode affective dimensions of objects,
events, and environments that they encounter in the normal course of their
daily routines. Recent research demonstrated that affective states elicited
by viewing pictures that varied in valence and arousal could be identified
from the whole brain activation patterns observed with fMRI (Baucom
et al., 2012). The current work investigated whether affective states can
be identified for dynamic naturalistic stimuli presented in an incidental
affective processing paradigm. Eleven participants were presented with
audiovisual stimuli reflecting high or low levels of arousal and positive or
negative valence in an fMRI experiment. Multivoxel pattern analysis was
used to predict valence and arousal within and across participants based
on distributed patterns of activity in functionally defined regions of interCognitive Neuroscience Society

209

Poster Session G
est. Perceptual features of the stimuli were regressed out prior to analyses. Results demonstrated above chance (p<.05) identification of valence
and arousal of the stimuli within participants, with accuracies comparable to Baucom et al. study. Valence of audiovisual stimuli was identified
in 10 out of 11 participants and arousal was identified in 8. Identification
of valence and arousal across participants was also above chance (p<.05).
Valence was identified in 9 participants and arousal was identified in 8. The
within-participant decoding results demonstrate that information unique
to valence and arousal lies within distributed patterns of brain activation
across the whole brain and the cross-participant results provide support for
a common neural basis for representation of affect across people.

G30
FEAR CONDITIONING IN A FLIP-BOOK – THE DUAL CEREBRAL
REPRESENTATION OF CUED AND CONTEXTUAL FEAR Hannah Genheimer1, Marta Andreatta1, Katharina Nueckel1, Evelyn Glotzbach-Schoon1,2,
Andreas Muehlberger3, Paul Pauli1; 1University of Wuerzburg, 2Seoul National
University College of Medicine, 3University of Regensburg — Contexts are a mul-

timodal set of circumstances around an event (Maren et al., 2013). According to animal studies, a context entails dual cerebral representation, which
involves increased amygdala activity for the processing of distinct elements
and hippocampus activity elicited by the processing of a conjunctive context. Goal of the current study was to disentangle the neural processes
underlying the elemental and hierarchical representations of a threatening context in humans. Twenty-seven subjects participated in habituation,
acquisition and test phases. Forty-nine controlled screenshots depicting
two virtual offices were presented in quick succession in order to create the
impression of walking through the rooms. During acquisition, one office
became the anxiety context (CXT+) since a painful electric shock, serving as
unconditioned stimulus (US), was paired with the offset of 1-3 screenshots.
Participants never perceived the US when the other room was presented,
serving as safety context (CXT-). After the acquisition, CXT+ evoked
increased arousal and anxiety and less valence compared to CXT-. Screenshots presenting either the safety context or the anxiety context when no US
was applied showed decreased early posterior negativity (EPN) amplitudes
compared to screenshots depicting the anxiety context at the time when an
US was presented, which indicates cue conditioning. The paradigm allows
the determination of not only sustained fear of the context, but also cued
fear of distinct screenshots serving as cue for the US. Our explicit data and
physiological recordings of neural correlates emphasize that two separated
neural systems are involved in contextual fear learning in humans.

G31
EVENTED RELATED POTENTIALS USING AN AIR JET TACTILE
STIMULATION Mohamed Yassine Tsalamlal1, Will Rizer2, Jean-Claude Martin1,
Mehdi Ammi1, Mounia Ziat2; 1Paris-South University, The Computer Science Laboratory for Mechanics and Engineering Sciences (LIMSI-CNRS), 2Northern Michigan University, Psychology Department — In this study, we examined events
related potentials during tactile air jet stimulation. The main goal was to
investigate a suitable tactile stimulation intended for affective communication systems such as being touched by a robotic device that has the same
features than a human touch. Participants were asked to rate a five point
Likert scale the valence (attractiveness or aversiveness) of the stimuli presented on their forearm. The stimulus consisted of an air flow that varied
in intensity (3 levels) and moving velocity (4 levels) along the left forearm.
Generally, low intensity stimuli were rated more positively than high intensity stimuli. The EEG data were sampled to 256 Hz and high-pass filtered at
1 Hz and epoched into segments stating at -500ms prior stimulus onset and
continued 2000ms post-stimulus onset. Independent component analysis
was used for blind-source decomposition of the data into 64 components.
Preliminary results showed significant differences between the conditions
in the contralateral central-parietal electrodes sites (CP4). ERPs of low
intensity stimuli show higher amplitudes compared to high intensity stimuli. Taking subjective ratings and EEG data together, results suggest that
light air jet stimulation is perceived as pleasant and may be assimilated to
a real human touch.

210

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

G32
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNATURE OF VIOLENCE DESENSITIZATION AND N2 ACTIVATION: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIAL
STUDY Shannin Moody B.S.1, Jena Michel2, Connie Lamm Ph.D.3; 1University
of New Orleans — One factor associated with increases in violent behavior
is emotional desensitization. Emotional desensitization to violence is the
normalization of violent or aggressive stimuli leading to deviant action
patterns. Using dense-array electroencephalography (EEG) and ERPs
(event-related potentials; averaged EEG) this study examines the neurophysiological signature underlying violence desensitization by looking at
N2 activation, a medial frontal ERP associated with response monitoring.
N2 activation was measured in late adolescent and young adults between
the ages of 18-25 years. The N2 was measured as the minimum (most negative) activation between 200 – 350 ms. We used a modified version of the
AX-CPT task to assess how much neurocognitive activation is used in order
to switch action strategies in the context of affectively charged pictures.
Additionally, we measured levels of aggression using the Buss Perry Scale
(BPS). The BPS is a widely used self-reporting measure of aggressive behavior. Results revealed that in the context of affectively charged pictures more
hostile participants showed smaller N2 amplitudes (less negative) than less
hostile participants, r2change = .06, F-change (1, 35) = 4.28, p = .05, β =
.33. These results suggest less emotional interference for aggressive participants while switching action strategies. While these results cannot directly
point at a specific causal factor contributing to aggression, it does suggest
that participants who score high in levels of aggression show less emotional
interference while executing an action. Thus, this emotional desensitization
might contribute to ongoing violent actions.

G33
CORTICAL THINNING IN BIPOLAR DISORDER SUBTYPES Derrek
Hibar1, Christopher Ching1,2, Benson Mwangi3, Jair Soares3, Paul Thompson1;
Imaging Genetics Center, USC, Marina del Rey, CA, USA, 2Interdepartmental
Neuroscience Graduate Program, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, US,
3
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, TX, USA — Reductions in anterior temporal, prefrontal, and
1

parietal cortical thickness have been reported in bipolar disorder but few
studies have compared thickness measures across the bipolar spectrum by
clinical subtype (BD type I, II and not otherwise specified). Working with
a large data set of 294 patients diagnosed with BD (185 BDI, 67 BDII, and
42 BD NOS) and 179 matched healthy controls, we hypothesized that bipolar subtype would be associated with lower cortical thickness in regions
supporting emotional and reward processing and control. Cortical thickness measures were derived from brain MRI using FreeSurfer. Statistical
analyses were carried out over 35 bilateral cortical regions using multiple
linear regression, and correcting for age, sex, age*age, and age*age*sex. We
set a significance threshold of P = 0.05/(35 ROIs * 6 diagnostic contrasts)
= 2.38x10-4. We did not detect significant differences in cortical thickness
between any BD subtype and controls. However, we found BD patients
diagnosed as “not otherwise specified” had significantly greater cortical
thinning in entorhinal, inferior temporal, middle temporal, rostral anterior
cingulate, superior temporal, and temporal pole cortical ROIs compared to
patients diagnosed with BD type 1. Our study reveals a pattern of reduced
cortical thickness mainly in temporal cortical regions previously hypothesized to be involved in BD and implicated in emotional and reward processing. These findings provide insight into the neurobiological patterns
across the spectrum of bipolar disorder.

G34
NEURAL NETWORKS FOR ANXIETY? DECREASED INTEGRATION
IN ASD OF SENSORIMOTOR AND EMOTIONAL PATHWAYS THAT
SUPPORT CLASSICAL FEAR CONDITIONING Christopher Doxey1, Mikle
South1, Nick Top1, Kevin Stephenson1, Brock Kirwan1; 1Brigham Young University
— Multimodal neuroimaging methods have the potential to elucidate spe-

cific networks underlying behavioral symptoms related to autism spectrum
disorders (ASD). We performed a classical fear conditioning fMRI experiment that revealed abnormal right amygdala and left anterior insula activation in ASD during early fear acquisition. We collected DTI data from the
same individuals and hypothesized that atypical activation during acquisi-

2015 Annual Meeting
tion and extinction of learned fear may be due to differences in white matter
connectivity in neural networks related to integrating fear recognition and
response. Participants included seventeen adults ages 18-29 diagnosed
with ASD and age- and IQ- matched controls. ROIs in right amygdala and
left insula, de¬fined from our fear conditioning fMRI data, were used as
seeds for a tractography analysis. Analyses of right amygdala tractography revealed significantly lower connectivity within the uncinate fasciculus, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, and inferior temporal gyrus white
matter tracts for ASD. The left anterior insula seed had greater connectivity
with the inferior frontal gyrus in ASD, but overall decreased connectivity
in the thalamocortical tract, superior longitudinal fasciculus, corticospinal
tract, and superior frontal gyrus white matter compared to controls. These
DTI results highlight underconnected networks from amygdala to frontal
lobe monitoring and decision making areas, and insula cortex to integration of sensorimotor information. These data support our hypothesis that
chronic everyday anxiety in individuals with ASD may arise from uncertainty regarding environmental cues related to fear and safety. Improved
understanding of the neural mechanisms that underlie unique manifestations of anxiety in ASD may result in better treatment specificity.

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring &
inhibitory control
G35
SEQUENTIAL GAINS AND LOSSES DURING GAMBLING FEEDBACK: DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS IN TIME-FREQUENCY THETA AND
DELTA MEASURES Matthew Bachman1, Amanda Lin1, Andrew Gradone1, Srikant Kothur2, Samuel Eckrich3, Edward Bernat1; 1University of Maryland College
Park, 2Florida State University, 3University of Central Florida — Recent work has

documented significant effects of sequential gain and loss outcomes on the
feedback negativity (FN) and P300 event-related potential (ERP) components from gambling tasks (Osinsky et al., 2012). Recent work from our
group has indicated that the FN and P300 can be better understood as a
mixture of theta (3-7 Hz) and delta (0-3 Hz) activity using time-frequency
(TF) approaches. In this study participants (n=27) completed a modified
version of the gambling task where outcomes for the task were forced into
sequences of one to eight gains or losses in a row. Using TF analysis, we
extracted delta and theta principal components to assess modulation relative to sequential outcomes. Results first replicated previous findings that
delta showed increases to gains and theta to losses. Next, a linear decrease
was observed across sequences for theta and delta (ps <= .017, Fs >= 6.649).
For delta, this was qualified by a significant decrease in amplitude for
losses (p = .001, F = 13.863) but no decrease for gains. This resulted in a
growing gain-loss difference across the sequences for delta. For theta, both
gains and losses decreased in amplitude across presentations, but gain-loss
differences were significant only in the first two presentations (ps <= .012),
becoming non-significant after that. Findings suggest that delta was more
sensitive to sequence effects than theta, supporting the view that theta is a
more simple response to salient stimulus parameters and delta sensitive to
a variety of more complex elaborative processing.

G36
DECIPHERING INTERFERENCE CONTROL IN ADULTS WITH
ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER Laurence Casini1,
Isabel Suarez1, Boris Burle1, David Pineda2, Carlos Tobon2, Francisco Lopera2,
Thierry Hasbroucq1; 1Aix-Marseille Université - CNRS, France, 2University of
Antioquia, Colombia — A deficit in “interference control” is commonly
found in adults with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
This has mainly been interpreted as difficulties in inhibiting inappropriate responses. However, interference control involves processes other than
simply the ability to inhibit. Consequently, we used sophisticated analysis
to decipher the additional processes interference control in these patients.
We compared interference control between 16 adults with ADHD and 15
control adults performing a Simon task. In most studies, performance is
generally reported in terms of mean error rates and reaction times. However, here we used distribution analyses of behavioral data, complemented
by analyses of electromyographic (EMG) activity. This allowed us to better
quantify the control of interference, specifically the part that remains

Poster Session G
hidden when pure correct trials are not distinguished from partial errors.
Partial errors correspond to subthreshold EMG bursts induced by incorrect
responses that immediately precede a correct response. The main findings
were that adults with ADHD were slower and showed a larger interference
effect in comparison to controls. However, the data as a whole revealed that
the larger interference effect was due neither to higher impulse expression,
nor to a deficit in inhibition. But, interestingly, adults with ADHD exhibited a deficit in conflict adaptation, specifically after non-conflict trials. We
propose and discuss the hypothesis that the interference control deficit
found in adults with ADHD would be due to difficulties for controlling
conflict after response facilitation induced by non-conflict trials.

G37
ATTENTIONAL INPUT GATING AS A MECHANISM OF PRO-ACTIVE RESPONSE SLOWING Zachary Langford1, Ruth M. Krebs1, Durk
Talsma1, Marty G Woldorff2, C.N. Boehler1; 1Universiteit Gent, 2Duke University
— Efficiently avoiding inappropriate actions in a changing environment is

central to cognitive control. One mechanism contributing to this ability is
the deliberate slowing down of responses in contexts where the full cancellation of such a response might be sometimes required. In the present
study electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings were performed to investigate the neural mechanisms of response time slowing in the context of
potential inhibition. Subjects performed a Stop-signal task in two blocks; a
standard (relevant) stop-signal block, and an irrelevant block, prompting
the subjects to ignore the stop-signal. In such a setup pro-active response
slowing usually occurs during the stop-signal relevant blocks, which we
studied here by contrasting the go-trials of both blocks. Single-trial analysis
(general linear model) was used to directly model the relationship between
response time and the EEG data of the go-trials in both contexts within a
multilevel framework. We found a relationship with response time already
at the level of the sensory N1 component in relevant blocks, a characteristic
fully absent in irrelevant blocks. Specifically, N1 amplitudes were lower
the slower the response time was suggesting that attentional resources are
being differentially deployed to control response speed. Response time and
the probability of inhibition exhibit a monotonic increasing relationship,
and thus successful inhibition is (partially) dependent on early attentional
processing of the go-signal. One viable explanation is that the attenuation
of N1 is an indicant of a pro-active mechanism that effectively distributes
processing resources temporally by adjusting a sensory input gate and consequently governing inhibition performance.

G38
TIMING THE AVAILABILITY OF PREDICTIVE SIGNALS: A CEREBELLAR ASYMMETRY FOR REGULATING WORD ASSOCIATION
PRIMING. Therese M. Gilligan1, Robert D. Rafal1; 1Bangor University — The
acquisition of language is underpinned by neural mechanisms that enable
learning of associations between sounds that are likely to occur in close
temporal relation. A stimulus that activates the meaning of a word will
facilitate processing of a semantically related item- semantic priming. Thus,
priming is a predictive process that facilitates efficient speech production,
comprehension and reading. Since discourse is temporally dynamic, the
benefits of priming depend on timing the availability of predictive signals.
If a primed word is activated too soon, it can compete with the word activating it, delaying access to the priming word or causing naming errors.
These errors are particularly conspicuous in some aphasic patients with
anomia who make frequent semantic parraphasic errors. Thus priming
must be modulated by brain mechanisms that facilitate and inhibit it with
a temporal precision needed for efficient language performance. Cerebellar circuitry provides a precise neural clock and has been implicated
in predicting not only the sensory consequences of action, but predictive
sentence processing. We tested whether these cerebellar predictions were
supported by inhibitory and facilitory processes. In a mixed group design
(n=41), automatic word association priming was measured in a lexical decision task before and after 40 seconds of continuous theta burst stimulation
of the left or right cerebellum (1cm below inion, 3cm lateral), or a vertex
control site. Left cerebellar stimulation decreased priming, whereas right
cerebellar stimulation increased priming. The results support the proposal
that the cerebellum contributes to facilitory and inhibitory processes that
dynamically regulate word priming.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

211

Poster Session G

G39
ENDOGENOUS VS. EXOGENOUS ACTION INHIBITION: A TMS-EEG
STUDY Stefania Ficarella1,2, Lorella Battelli2; 1Cimec-Center for Mind/Brain
Sciences, Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Center for Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems@
UniTn, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rovereto (TN), Italy — Inhibi-

tory control, a crucial aspect of executive functions, is directly involved in
the inhibition of unwanted responses. Action inhibition can be triggered by
an exogenous stimulus in the environment, such as a red traffic light, or by
endogenous decisions. While the first type has been extensively studied,
less is known about the endogenous inhibition of actions. Specifically, it is
still unclear whether separate circuits are responsible for the two types of
inhibition. This study aims to test the causal role of two brain areas, namely
the dorsal fronto-median cortex (dFMC) and the right Inferior Frontal
Gyrus (rIFG), respectively considered to be involved in the endogenous
and exogenous inhibition of actions, when implementing the inhibition of
unwanted responses. We designed a novel cognitive task to directly compare a condition which induces participants to freely decide whether to
perform an action or to inhibit it, with an exogenous inhibition condition.
We tested 19 participants before and after 1 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) over dFMC, rIFG and V1. Results show a significant reduction of action inhibition after stimulation of dFMC in the endogenous inhibition condition only. Since rTMS is known to inhibit the normal
activity of the stimulated brain area, a reduction of action inhibition, after
suppression of the dFMC activity, provides evidence for the causal role of
this area in inhibiting endogenously-triggered actions. Furthermore, EEG
data results corroborate a neurophysiological distinction between endogenous and exogenous action inhibition showing significant differences in the
amplitude of stimulus-locked ERPs between the two conditions.

G40
EARLIER AND MORE DISTRIBUTED NEURAL NETWORKS FOR
BILINGUALS THAN MONOLINGUALS DURING SWITCHING Kalinka
Timmer1, John G. Grundy1, Ellen Bialystok1; 1York University — Bilinguals often
outperform monolinguals on measures of task-switching, but this behavioral advantage is not always present. To explore the neuronal basis of these
effects, we examined task-switching (color/shape) and language-switching
(English/French) in English monolinguals and French-English bilinguals
while EEG was recorded. Both tasks included single task and mixed task
blocks. English monolinguals knew some French vocabulary from minimal
school instruction. In the non-verbal task, the RT analysis showed effects
of mixing cost (pure vs. mix) and switching cost (repeat vs. switch) but no
language group differences. The accuracy analysis showed similar effects
for mixing and switching costs, but bilinguals were more accurate in the
mixed block than monolinguals. ERP analysis indicated more distributed
electrophysiological networks for bilinguals (N1/N2/P3) in mixing costs
and earlier latencies for bilinguals (N2/P3) in switching costs. In the language-switching task, the RT and accuracy analyses showed mixing costs
and switching costs with no group differences for the English trials. ERP
analysis showed a mixing cost for both monolinguals and bilinguals on the
N2, but only monolinguals revealed a mixing cost in the later P3, indicating
more need for executive control. The switching cost was present in the P3
for both groups, again with a more distributed network for bilinguals than
monolinguals. Thus, even with similar behavioral outcomes, different electrophysiology was revealed for the two language groups. The more distributed and earlier activation of neural networks for bilinguals might reflect
the integration of verbal and non-verbal control networks and underlie the
bilingual advantage seen across the lifespan.

G41
EFFECTS OF ROSTRAL ANTERIOR CINGULATE CORTEX LESIONS
ON PERFORMANCE MONITORING IN HUMANS: IMPAIRED
ERROR-RELATED NEGATIVITY BUT INTACT ERROR AWARENESS
Martin E. Maier1,2, Francesco Di Gregorio1, Teresa Muricchio2, Giuseppe Di Pellegrino2,3; 1Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, 2Centro Studi e Ricerche
in Neuroscienze Cognitive Cesena, 3University of Bologna — Detecting one’s
own errors and appropriately correcting behavior are crucial for efficient
goal-directed performance. A correlate of rapid evaluation of behavioral
outcomes is the error negativity/error-related negativity (Ne/ERN) that is

212

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
seen already at the time of the erroneous response over frontal brain areas.
However, whether the Ne/ERN is a necessary precondition for the subsequent emergence of error awareness remains unclear. The present study
investigated this question by measuring the Ne/ERN and error signaling
responses in seven human patients with lesions in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex located in the medial PFC performing a flanker task. The Ne/
ERN was severely attenuated in these patients, but they showed no impairment in error signaling. Impairments of the Ne/ERN went along with a failure to increase response accuracy on trials following errors. These results
demonstrate that while an intact Ne/ERN is crucial for adaptive post-error
adjustments, it is not a necessary precondition for error awareness.

G42
COMMON NEURAL CORRELATES INVOLVED IN INHIBITORY
REGULATION OF MEMORY AND EMOTION REVEALED BY DATA
DRIVEN ANALYSES Farah Naaz1, Brendan Depue1; 1University of Louisville, 2University of Louisville — Self-regulation of memory and emotion are
critical aspects of normal cognitive function. Difficulties in regulation of
memory and emotion are ubiquitous in psychiatric disorders. Because of
the entwined nature of memory and emotion, it is highly probable that
their regulation involves common brain regions. In general, these inhibitory mechanisms involve up-regulation of the right lateral prefrontal
cortex (rLPFC), which is putatively associated with down-regulation of
task related effectors in posterior/sub-cortical regions. To investigate the
common neural mechanisms between regulation of memory and emotion
a data driven approach using Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
was conducted. Twenty-three participants performed the Think/No-think
(TNT) and Emotion Regulation (ER) tasks while undergoing fMRI. ICA
components were selected on the basis of a priori hypotheses based on previous neuroimaging findings that suggest inhibitory regulation emanates
predominantly from the rLPFC. Results yielded spatially overlapping ICA
components that included up-regulation of right middle frontal gyrus
(rMFG), right posterior cingulate cortex (rPCC), and right angular gyrus
(rAG). These regions were associated with down-regulation of task related
activity in posterior/sub-cortical task related regions. The overlapping activation of right hemispheric regions: MFG, PCC, and AG, suggest that these
regions play a critical part in executing inhibitory regulation across the psychological domains of memory and emotion. This data is consistent with
the idea that the rMFG is involved in implementing inhibitory regulation
goals, while the role of rPCC and rAG may be related to self-awareness and
reorienting attention during attempts to regulate memory and emotion.

G43
THE CORRECT-RESPONSE NEGATIVITY AS AN INDEX OF PERCEPTUAL UNCERTAINTY Paul J. Beatty1, George A. Buzzell1, Daniel M. Roberts1,
Craig G. McDonald1; 1George Mason University — Previous work investigating

the neural basis of performance monitoring has identified event-related
potential (ERP) components, such as the error-related negativity (ERN) and
correct-response negativity (CRN), which have been linked to error detection and response conflict. However, recent work suggests that the CRN
may selectively index response uncertainty when stimulus discrimination
is difficult. Of note, previous reports inferred uncertainty by manipulating
discrimination difficulty, as opposed to directly evaluating the certainty of
participants’ decisions. In the present experiment, EEG was recorded while
participants performed a difficult visual discrimination task and reported
their subjective certainty of responses on a trial-by-trial basis. Discrimination difficulty was titrated on an individual basis to produce performance
accuracy of approximately 70%, ensuring that task difficulty was comparable across participants. We investigated the electrophysiological correlates
of perceptual uncertainty by comparing CRN amplitude for subjectively-reported sure and unsure trials. Analysis of correct responses revealed
a larger CRN deflection on trials in which individuals were uncertain of
the stimulus identity, compared to trials in which individuals were certain
of the stimulus identity. These findings provide additional evidence that
the CRN indexes uncertainty associated with decisions in which sensory
evidence is limiting.

2015 Annual Meeting

G44
IMPULSE DYSREGULATION AND P300 AMPLITUDE REDUCTIONS
(P3AR) FROM A 3-CATEGORY VISUAL ODDBALL TASK: DIFFERENTIAL SENSITIVITY OF THETA AND DELTA TIME-FREQUENCY
MEASURES Jessica S. Ellis1, Matthew D. Bachman1, Anne V. Tootell1, Adreanna T. Massey1, Edward M. Bernat1; 1University of Maryland College Park,
Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience Lab — Impulse dysregulation indicates a
propensity for aggression and externalizing behaviors, which is associated
with future psychopathology. Externalizing behaviors have been associated with reductions in amplitude of P300 event-related potential (ERP)
measures from both target and novel conditions using common oddball
tasks. Using time-frequency approaches, recent work suggests common
ERP components such as P300 and the preceding N2 are accounted for by
unique contributions of activity in the delta (0-3 Hz) and theta (3-7 Hz)
ranges, and that P300 amplitude reduction (P3AR) is related to delta, but
not theta. The current study assessed differences in delta and theta activity related to individual differences in impulse dysregulation. We assessed
(P3AR) in the time-domain relative to time-frequency, including differential sensitivity of delta and theta activity. Subjects (N = 124) completed a
three-stimulus visual oddball task, with IAPS pictures serving as novel
stimuli. Results replicated significant P3AR relative to impulse dysregulation for both target (r= -.215, p<.018) and novel (r= -.272, p<.003) conditions.
These effects were directly reflected in time-frequency delta measures
(target, r= -.189, p=0.036; novel, r= -.253, p=0.005). Theta evidenced significant reductions during target processing (r= -.197, p=.029), but not novel
(r= -.033, p=.718). This selective reduction suggests that medial-frontal novelty orienting processes in theta were not attenuated relative to impulse
dysregulation, in contrast to delta activity which evidenced similar reductions in both conditions This finding is consistent with previous work, and
suggests that functional attenuation of these aspects of brain function relative to impulse dysregulation is selective and not global.

G45
EXPECTANCY EFFECTS IN FEEDBACK PROCESSING ARE
EXPLAINED PRIMARILY BY TIME-FREQUENCY DELTA NOT THETA
Adreanna Massey1, Matthew Bachman1, Anne Tootell1, Jessica Ellis1, Srikant
Kothur2, Samuel Eckrich3, Edward Bernat1; 1University of Maryland College Park,
2
Florida State University, 3University of Central Florida — The role of expectancy

in feedback processing has been investigated as an important factor modulating event-related potential (ERP) measures including feedback negativity (FN) and P300. Previous work has demonstrated modulation of the
P300 relative to expectancy, but results for the FN have been more inconsistent. Recent work from our group has shown that processes underlying the FN and P300 are better understood as separable processes in the
theta (3-7 Hz) and delta (0-3 Hz) range using time-frequency analysis. This
work suggests that theta activity is primarily modulated by the most salient
stimulus features while activity in delta is sensitive to both primary salient
features and a range of higher level processing related to secondary stimulus attributes (Bernat et al., in press). The current study assessed whether
expectancy-related processing in a gambling feedback task could be more
selectively indexed using time-frequency analysis than traditional time-domain FN and P300 measures. Participants (N=21) were instructed to choose
between two monetary options, ranging from a higher probability of winning with a lower potential payout to a lower probability of winning with
a higher potential payout, producing expected and unexpected gains and
losses. Time-domain results replicated previous research: P300 amplitude
was significantly modulated by expectancy (F(2,19)=10.83, p=.001), while
FN amplitude was not. Time-frequency analysis indicated that expectancy-related modulations were only observed in delta (F(2,19)=6.99, p=.005),
not theta. Further, regression analyses predicting time-domain ERPs with
time-frequency measures revealed differences in expectancy among FN
and P300 were explained primarily by delta for both gain and loss feedback.

Poster Session G

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working
memory
G46
NEURAL MECHANISMS OF INTENTIONAL AND INCIDENTAL
BINDING IN WORKING MEMORY David Luck1,2, Stéphanie Grot1,2;
1

Institut Universitaire en Santé Mentale de Montréal - Research Centre, Canada,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Montreal, Canada — Rationale: An

2

important quality of human cognition is the ability to associate different
aspects of an experience into personal events. This associative process is
commonly referred to as binding, and is related to working memory (WM)
capacity. When assessing WM binding, studying different encoding conditions could be useful. Hence, encoding processes can occur incidentally
without conscious effort, or intentionally including to some extent conscious effort. Objectives: This fMRI study attempted to identify the neuronal
correlates of intentional and incidental binding. We hypothesize that intentional binding relies on a fronto-temporal network, while the incidental
form is mediated by the hippocampus, exclusively. Methods: Twenty participants were scanned while memorizing three coloured words and three
coloured spatial locations. In the intentional binding condition, the three
words were central and separated from the three ellipses. Participants had
to mentally link the verbal and spatial information sharing the same color
(e.g. the word in red must be associated with the position defined by a red
ellipse). In the incidental binding condition, words were directly presented
in ellipses. In the separate condition, the three words were central and separated from the three ellipses, and had to be memorized as is. Results: FMRI
analyses revealed greater hippocampal activity for both forms of binding,
relative to the separate condition. Conversely, greater prefrontal activity
was observed for intentional, but not incidental, binding. Functional analyses revealed greater fronto-temporal connectivity for intentional, but not
incidental, binding. Conclusions: The present results reveal that intentional
and incidental binding relies on distinct neural substrates.

G47
INVESTIGATING THE LINKS BETWEEN WORKING MEMORY AND
CHILDREN’S MATHEMATICS IN SIXTH GRADE: AN EVENT-RELATED POTENTIALS STUDY. Liu Pei Yi1, Shen I Hsuan1; 1Department of
Occupational Therapy, Graduate Institute of Behavioral Sciences, Chang Gung
University — Problem solving is recognized as an important life skill. It is

a crucial and fundamental component of the school mathematics curriculum. Working memory (WM) plays a critical role in integrating information
during problem solving. WM represents the ability to temporarily maintain
and manipulate information in connection with cognitive tasks. Previous
studies indicated that WM is related to and important for mathematical
performance. The present study investigated the WM performance by using
spatial and verbal n-back paradigms between children with high (n=22) and
low (n=22) mathematic ability. On the same time, the underlying process
was measured through event-related potentials (ERPs). Group with low
mathematic ability showed delayed reaction time (F(1,41)=5.79, p=0.0208),
delayed N1 peak latency (F(1,42)=13.557, p=0.001), and enhanced N1 mean
amplitudes (F(1,42)=5.651, p=0.022) on verbal WM task. It seems that group
with low mathematic ability processed slowly in basic verbal processes and
needed more neuron activities. Delayed N2 peak latency (F(1,42)=6.678,
p=0.013) on spatial WM task was also found in group with low mathematic
ability, indicating slowed conflict-monitoring. Larger P3 mean amplitudes
on both spatial (F(1,42)=4.637, p=0.037) and verbal (F(1,42)=6.976, p=0.012)
WM tasks were observed in group with high mathematic ability relative
to group with low mathematic ability showed that group with low mathematic ability could be less efficient on spatial and verbal WM processes.

G48
IMPLICIT WORKING MEMORY IS STILL WORKING DURING
VISUAL SEARCH Eunhee Ji1, Kyung-Min Lee1, Suhyon Ahn1, Yu-Jin Choi1,
Min-Shik Kim1; 1Yonsei University — The current study investigated whether

implicit working memory shared common cognitive resources with explicit
working memory. We used a revised working memory paradigm (Hassin,
Bargh, Engell, & McCulloch, 2009) where a moving and changing visual
search display appears 5 times. For each display, participants had to find

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

213

Poster Session G
a ‘T’ among three ‘L’s in a 2 x 2 array display as soon as possible. In the
pattern set condition, the display movements followed a pre-determined
pattern (e.g., zigzag); in the yoked broken pattern set condition, the movements of the first four displays followed that same pattern but the fifth
display did not. A random half of the participants were in the explicit
group, or told that some sets follow patterns, and that extracting these
patterns may improve visual search performance. The implicit group was
not told anything. We found that, as expected, response times for finding
the 5thtarget were faster in the pattern set condition than in the broken
pattern set condition. However, this was only true for the implicit group.
There was no difference between the two conditions in the explicit group.
This finding suggests that implicit working memory can improve visual
search in the pattern set compared to the broken pattern set by extracting
moving patterns of the search displays even when participants use the cognitive resource of spatial working memory during visual search. It could
be inferred from this results that explicit working memory does not seem
to share their limited discrete cognitive resources with implicit working
memory.

G49
SENSORY PROCESSING PATTERNS PREDICT THE BIAS OF
ENSEMBLE STATISTICS FOR ITEMS HELD IN VISUAL WORKING
MEMORY Matthew X. Lowe1,2, Ryan A. Stevenson1, Kristin E. Wilson1, Natasha
E. Ouslis1, Marzyeh Azimi1, Morgan D. Barense1,3, Jonathan S. Cant2, Susanne
Ferber1,3; 1University of Toronto, 2University of Toronto Scarborough, 3Rotman
Research Institute, Baycrest — Given the limited resources of visual work-

ing memory, multiple items may be remembered as an averaged group
or ensemble. While local information may be ill-defined, these ensemble
representations provide accurate diagnostics of the environment by combining item-level information with gist information. Integrating information across multiple levels of abstraction rather than representing each item
independently affords an increase in the accuracy of lower-level summary
statistics for stored items. Recently, Brady & Alvarez (2011) reported evidence in favour of such hierarchical representations in visual working
memory by demonstrating that the remembered size of an item was biased
toward the mean size of items sharing the same common features. Here,
we propose extending the study of ensemble processing by not only considering the statistics of the display, but also the statistics of the observers.
In the study reported here, we utilize the Adult Sensory Profile to demonstrate that sensory threshold and responding strategy predict a directional
memory bias for the integration of ensemble statistics with individual items
held in visual working memory. Specifically, our findings suggest that
individuals scoring higher in sensory processing traits reflecting greater
sensory hypersensitivity and active avoidance strategies are more likely to
be biased away from the mean size representation of a set of items, while
individuals scoring lower in these traits are more likely to be biased toward
the mean size representation. These findings indicate that stable traits in
sensory processing may influence the encoding and retrieval of multiple
items in visual working memory.

G50
THE EFFECT OF MATH ANXIETY ON BASIC MAGNITUDE PROCESSING AND CALCULATION WITH HIGH VS. LOW WORKING
MEMORY LOAD Kyungmin Lee1, Soohyun Cho1; 1Chung-Ang University —
Mathematics anxiety (MA) refers to the experience of negative affect when
engaged in mathematical activity. Individuals who experience more MA
perform worse on various measures of mathematical problem solving.
There are two opposing theories on the effect of MA in relation to working
memory (WM) load. Ashcraft & Kirk (2001) suggest that MA compromises
performance only when there is a significant WM load. In contrast, Maloney et al. (2010) propose that MA results from impairment in fundamental numerical processing and thus should affect mathematical cognition
ubiquitously, regardless of WM demand. The present study tested these
hypotheses by examining the effect of MA on magnitude comparison and
calculation with high vs. low WM load. Participants’ MA was measured
along with performance on magnitude comparison (numerosity, area comparison) and calculation with high vs. low WM load (Carrying/Borrowing
Required vs. Carrying/Borrowing Not-Required). Individuals with high
MA showed worse calculation performance only in the high WM condition. In addition, MA scores were positively correlated with performance

214

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
(RT) difference between the high vs. low WM conditions of calculation;
i.e., higher the MA, greater the RT cost for high vs. low WM calculation.
There was no difference between high vs. low MA groups in the low WM
condition of calculation or any magnitude comparison task. MA scores did
not correlate with accuracy on either magnitude comparison tasks. These
results demonstrate that the negative effect of MA is selective for cognitive
operations that are high in WM demand.

G51
CHANGES IN GLOBAL AND REGIONAL MODULARITY ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASING WORKING MEMORY LOAD Matthew Stanley1, Dale Dagenbach1, Robert Lyday1, Jonathan Burdette1, Paul Laurienti1; 1Wake
Forest University — The recent use of graph theory measures in complex net-

work analyses of neuroimaging data has allowed for the identification and
classification of global and regional brain network properties as well as
the ability to quantify changes in network properties across different task
conditions. We investigated the effects of increasing working memory processing load on functional brain network modularity in a cohort of young
adults. Measures of modularity in complex brain networks quantify how
well a network is organized into densely interconnected communities.
We investigated changes in both the large-scale modular organization of
the functional brain network as a whole and regional changes in modular
organization as demands on working memory increased from n = 1 to n
= 2 on the standard n-back task. We further investigated the relationship
between modular properties across working memory load conditions and
behavioral performance. Our results showed that regional modular organization within the default mode and working memory circuits significantly
changed from 1-back to 2-back task conditions. However, the regional
modular organization was not associated with behavioral performance.
Global measures of modular organization did not change with working
memory load but were associated with individual variability in behavioral performance. These findings indicate that while regional changes in
modular properties were highly sensitive to increases in external cognitive
demands, only global changes in modular properties were sensitive to
changes in behavioral performance across load conditions.

G52
DIFFERENT ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL CORRELATES UNDERLYING FRAGILE AND ROBUST VISUAL SHORT-TERM MEMORY.
Annelinde Vandenbroucke1,2, Ilja Sligte2,3, Jade de Vries2, Mike X Cohen2, Victor
Lamme2; 1UC Berkeley, 2University of Amsterdam, 3University of Birmingham
— Recently, we have found evidence for a Visual Short-Term Memory

(VSTM) stage that lies in between iconic memory and robust VSTM (Sligte
et al., 2008; 2009). Classical VSTM experiments using a Change Detection
paradigm show that items in VSTM are stored in a stable form, yet with
a limited capacity of around four objects. Interestingly, when a partial-report paradigm is used, capacity is boosted to up to twice that amount, even
when cue-timings outlast iconic memory traces. These additional items are
however erased when new objects appear, hence we term this intermediate storage fragile VSTM. Although behaviorally, fragile and robust VSTM
can be dissociated (Vandenbroucke et al., 2011; 2014), a neural distinction remains to be elucidated. Here, we investigated whether fragile and
robust VSTM have different electrophysiological underpinnings using EEG
time-frequency analyses. Twenty-four subjects performed a Change Detection task in which a cue was presented in between the memory and test
display (gauging fragile VSTM) or during the test display (gauging robust
VSTM). Memory displays contained 2, 4, 6 or 8 oriented rectangles. For
robust VSTM, ceiling performance was reached at 4 objects, while fragile
VSTM performance kept rising up to 8 objects. The capacity scores for fragile VSTM and robust VSTM correlated with different frequency bands, such
as a relative decrease in parietal-occipital alpha power and increase in central and frontal gamma power for fragile VSTM compared to robust VSTM.
This shows that fragile and robust VSTM rely on different mechanisms, and
are possibly supported by different attentional strategies.

G53
THE EFFECT OF A VIRTUAL REALITY TSST ON FALSE MEMORY
Deidre O’Dell1, David Fraser1; 1Chatham University — Objective: The objective of

this study was to test the hypothesis that increases in stress induced cortisol
correlate to changes in false memory rates. A false memory is defined as

2015 Annual Meeting
the generation of a new memory for an event that did not transpire. Methods: There were 32 participants (27 female, 5 male, mean age 22.5 years,
range 18 -30). Stress was induced using a version of the Trier’s Social Stress
Test that was adapted to use a virtual reality audience (vrTSST). A visual
analog scale (VAS) for anxiety was used to assess subjective stress levels.
Cortisol was measured using saliva ELISA/EIA assay. False memory rates
were measured using free recall and recognition tasks following a hybrid
Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm. Word lists included both
semantic and phonological lures. Saliva samples were taken upon arrival
(0 min), after the stress protocol (15 min), and after the memory tasks (45
min). Results: The vrTSST was successful in inducing a moderate increase
in cortisol in a subset of the subject population. Subjects reported significant changes in subjective stress as a result of the vrTSST. Increases in cortisol correlated with greater accuracy on recall and recognition as well as
fewer false memories. Conclusions: It is proposed that the moderate elevation of cortisol induced by the vrTSST is consistent with existing literature
showing that the effect of cortisol on cognitive processes often follows an
inverted U-shaped pattern. Mild to moderate increases in cortisol can have
beneficial effects, but larger increases can be deleterious.

G54
USING THE CONTRALATERAL DELAY ACTIVITY TO PROBE THE
NATURE OF TASK SETS REPRESENTATIONS Atsushi Kikumoto1,
Lauren Williams1, Selina Robson1, Ulrich Mayr1; 1University of Oregon — Selecting

and preparing one action plan or task set among several competing plans
is often considered an important working memory (WM) function. Yet,
measures of WM capacity and task switching are usually not correlated,
raising the question how these different aspects of cognitive control are
functionally related. We used the EEG-derived contralateral delay activity
(CDA; Vogel et al., 2004) to probe the content of WM while participants
prepared for each trial a novel task-set of either two or four stimulus-response rules. Consistent with results with standard WM tasks, there was
a greater CDA set-size effect (2 vs. 4 rules) for high than low WM capacity
individuals. Also, both WM capacity and the set-size effect correlated with
task-selection performance. In contrast, when we limited the number of
constellations of task-sets throughout the experiment (similar to standard
task-switching experiments), the CDA pattern suggested a sustained, yet
set-size independent use of WM. A significant correlation between task-selection performance and individuals’ WM capacity gradually disappeared
as participants learned task-sets. These results suggest that task-selection
does in fact require working memory. However, while novel task-sets are
represented in WM in a detailed, load-dependent manner, familiar tasks
are represented in a load-independent, compressed manner—likely in form
of pointers to long-term memory representations.

G55
NEURAL DISSOCIATION FOR VISUAL AND SENSORIMOTOR
WORKING MEMORY STORAGE: EVIDENCE FOR A MNEMONIC
HOMUNCULUS. Alejandro Galvez-Pol1, Beatriz Calvo-Merino1,2, Almudena
Capilla3, Bettina Forster1; 1City University London, 2Universidad Complutense de
Madrid, 3Universidad Autonoma de Madrid — The contralateral delay activity

(CDA) is the electrophysiological signature of encoding and maintenance
in human visual memory. The CDA is an enhanced amplitude (300–900ms
post-stimulus onset) over the hemisphere contralateral to the presentation
side of the remembered items, which is modulated by the number of items
(load) held in visual working memory. However, recent behavioural work
on working memory using body related stimuli has suggested an additional embodiment process necessary to encode sensorimotor information
(e.g. bodies, actions). To test whether there is an independent sensorimotor
memory storage similar to the one visually described, we directly measured
participants’ somatosensory-evoked activity by tactually probing (fingertips) the state of the somatosensory system during a working memory task
using body related stimuli (hand postures) and matched visual stimuli
(geometrical shapes) while controlling for visual effects. Visual evoked
potentials (VEPs) showed a significant interaction between hemisphere
and load in the geometrical shapes condition only, suggesting the presence
of CDA over visual regions similar to what has been previously shown.
Interestingly, a similar interaction was found for the same time window
(300-900ms) in the somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs) over central/
posterior electrodes but for the hand condition only. Such activity suggests

Poster Session G
a sensorimotor CDA reflecting encoding and maintenance of visually processed body stimuli in an independent storage from the one used for nonbody visual stimuli. These results provide evidence for a direct relationship
between neural activity and specific sensorimotor working memory storage, suggesting a separate sensorimotor working memory storage from the
classical visual memory system.

LANGUAGE: Development & aging
G56
YEARS OF EDUCATION PREDICT ONLY A SUBSET OF LANGUAGE
AND COGNITIVE TASKS AMONG OLDER ADULTS Jet M. J. Vonk1, Eve
Higby1,2,3, Dalia Cahana-Amitay2,3, Loraine K. Obler1,2,3; 1The Graduate Center of
the City University of New York, 2Boston University School of Medicine, 3Boston VA
Healthcare System — Level of education, as measured by Years of Education

(YoE), has often been associated with cognitive vitality in aging. However,
whether YoE also affects age-related language performance has not been
explored. To address this question, we analyzed data from healthy older
adults who performed multiple language and cognitive tasks. The analyses included between 109 and 261 participants, based on the number of
participants who completed each task. Multiple regression analyses controlling for age and gender revealed that for tasks of lexical retrieval, YoE
predicted object naming accuracy (β=.239, p<.001) and response times (β=.143, p=.030), and action naming accuracy (β=.221, p<.001) but not response
times. YoE also predicted phonemic (β=.205, p=.001) and semantic (β=.145,
p=.024) fluency. For sentence-comprehension, YoE predicted accuracy for
sentences containing negative markers (β=.238, p=.012) but not response
times. YoE did not predict comprehension of embedded clauses. In terms of
cognitive tasks, YoE predicted performance on all three working memory
tasks: listening span (β=.230, p=.001), month ordering (β=.185, p=.004), and
digit ordering (β=.172, p=.008). It also predicted Trail-making performance
(β=-.140, p=.024), but did not predict performance on the Mini Mental State
Examination, inhibition tasks (Stroop, Stop-signal), or cognitive speed tasks
(choice reaction time, letter comparison, pattern comparison). These findings suggest that level of education plays an important role in older adults’
lexical retrieval skills, and to some extent, in their sentence comprehension abilities, however its relation to cognitive performance is restricted to
effects on working memory and set-shifting.

G57
SPATIAL SEPARATION OF CORTICAL ACTIVITY ASSOCIATED WITH
FIRST AND SECOND LANGUAGE PROCESSING IN LATE SECOND
LANGUAGE LEARNERS Morgan B. Johnson1, Therese M. Chevalier1, Julia
Fuchs1, Shaun Boe1, Aaron J. Newman1; 1Dalhousie University — There is debate
concerning whether languages learned in adulthood (L2s) engage the
same brain regions as native languages (L1s). Previous studies have found
equivocal results in this regard; the amount of exposure and proficiency
in L2 may influence the findings. Here we controlled exposure by providing a fixed amount of training with new L2 vocabulary. The present study
involved native English speakers who learned 48 words (nouns and verbs)
in a language new to them (Spanish) over 2 training sessions (1 hour total).
Training was delivered using prototype software employing video games
and speech recognition (LANGA; Copernicus Studios, Halifax, NS). Immediately after the second training session, participants completed a picture
naming task in English and Spanish during fMRI scanning. Data analysis focused on activation in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). While areas
of activation for English and Spanish overlapped, we found a significant
difference between the peaks for Spanish and English activation within the
IFG. The number of suprathreshold voxels overlapping between L1 and
L2 in the left IFG was equivalent to the number of voxels activated by each
language alone. Although IFG activation was overall left-lateralized, in
the right IFG we found more extensive activation for L1 than L2. These
results suggest that even at early stages of L2 vocabulary learning, distinct
but overlapping regions of the IFG are recruited for L2 as compared to L1
naming. Furthermore, contrary to some previous claims, we do not find
evidence for greater right IFG involvement in L2 than L1 production.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

215

Poster Session G

G58
MORE BILATERAL, MORE ANTERIOR: ALTERATIONS OF BRAIN
ORGANIZATION IN LARGE-SCALE STRUCTURAL NETWORK IN
CHINESE DYSLEXIA Ting Qi1, Bin Gu1, Guosheng Ding1, Gaolang Gong1,
Chunming Lu1, Li Liu*1; 1Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China — Local

structural abnormality has been frequently reported in dyslexia, however whether dyslexia is impaired in large-scale structural brain network
remains unclear. Here, structural magnetic resonance imaging data of 17
Chinese reading disabled (RD) and 17 age-matched typically developing
children (TD) were used to construct cortical thickness and surface area
networks respectively. RD compared to TD showed reduced nodal centrality in the left hemisphere along with enhanced nodal centrality mainly
in the right hemisphere brain regions in thickness network. As for surface
area network, RD compared to TD demonstrated lower nodal centrality in
the posterior brain regions but higher nodal centrality in the anterior brain
regions. Such an anteverted tendency was further supported by the hub
distribution pattern in both thickness and surface area networks. Specifically, hubs in RD were more distributed in frontal, less likely in parietal
areas, whereas TD showed an opposite pattern. These findings indicated
that the abnormal functional connectivity in dyslexia reported in previous
studies might be rooted in the aberrant structural connectivity. These findings also indicated that the aberrant structural connectivity in the dyslexics
was not only due to compensating for poor reading in the late development
reflected by the altered thickness network, but may also be a congenital
effect during the prenatal development reflected by the altered surface network.

G59
INTERACTION BETWEEN NATIVE AND SECOND LANGUAGE NETWORKS : A FUNCTIONAL MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
STUDY OF CHINESE-ENGLISH BILINGUAL CHILDREN Yue Gao1,
Guosheng Ding1, Xiangzhi Meng2, Li Liu1; 1National Key laboratory of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, 2Department of Psychology, Peking University — Do bilingual children recruit both native and

second language neural networks in second language reading as adults do?
Does second language and native tongue affect one another in bilingual
children’s brain? We used fMRI to test phonological and orthographical
processing of Chinese-English bilingual children(n=28; mean age=9.9±0.7)
in both languages, and defined regions of interest(ROI)based on meta-analysis of cross-language comparison. ROI analysis revealed that some Chinese-specific regions(bilateral inferior occipital gyrus, cingulate gyrus, and
right fusiform gyrus)were significantly activated in English tasks. Similarly,
some English-specific regions(left fusiform gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, and
medial frontal gyrus)were significantly activated in Chinese tasks. Among
these regions, Increased activation of the Chinese-specific cingulate gyrus
was negatively correlated with WRAT-3(Wide Range Achievement Test)
letter test and English dictation test scores, suggesting that the higher the
second language proficiency was, the less the native language network was
involved. However, while increased activation in the English-specific left
superior temporal gyrus was negatively correlated with Chinese reading
fluency and character recognition test scores, activation in the English-specific left inferior frontal gyrus was positively associated with greater Chinese reading fluency scores - suggesting that second language processing
may be affected by native language proficiency. Summarily, these results
suggest that while bilingual children do develop a distinct neural network
to process their second language, it is also partly supported by the brain’s
native language network. Additionally, this study indicates that the neural
networks supporting native and second language in bilinguals’ brain interact with one another.

G60
EFFECTS OF ACOUSTIC DEGRADATION ON NEURAL ACTIVITY FOR
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION OVER DEVELOPMENT Saloni Krishnan1,3, Robert Leech2, Samuel Evans1, Evelyne Mercure1, Frederic Dick3; 1University College London, 2Imperial College London, 3Birkbeck, University of London
— The refinement of domain-general attentional abilities plays an important role in language comprehension throughout development. Attentional
and perceptual “stress” (typically imposed by additional processing loads)

216

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
is known to impair language comprehension in healthy adults, who show
patterns of interference resembling those of adult aphasics. Such “stressors”
also influence children’s sentence comprehension accuracy, particularly
worsening the comprehension of complex syntax. Despite this, we know
almost nothing about how children’s brains deal with increased processing
loads in language tasks. For the first time, the influence of adverse listening
conditions on children’s neural activity for language comprehension was
explored. We compared 19 adults and 32 7-to 13-year-old children listening
to both clear and degraded (low-pass filtered+time-compressed) sentences
in the scanner. The sentences varied in syntactic complexity, ranging from
simple (active/subject clefts) to complex (passives/object clefts). Averaged
over the two groups, listening to clear>degraded speech was associated
with greater activation over bilateral lateral superior temporal gyri; listening to syntactically complex>simple sentences also elicited greater activity
over inferior frontal gyri. In all four listening conditions, adults showed
greater activity in bilateral superior temporal and subcentral gyri compared
to children.Our results also suggest a complex interplay between age, language ability, and neural activity during sentence comprehension in children. In particular, we found greater left-lateralisation with increasing age
and language ability in the planum temporale and the superior temporal
gyrus. In tandem with language production findings from the same sample
of children these results suggest long-tailed developmental changes in the
brain networks underlying language learning and expertise.

G61
MONOLINGUAL AND BILINGUAL INFANTS SHOW DIFFERENT
PATTERNS OF BRAIN ACTIVITY WHEN SEGMENTING SPEECH.
Elena Neophytou1, Caroline Junge2, Natalie Roch1, Debra Mills1; 1Bangor University, 2University of Amsterdam — The ability to segment words from continu-

ous speech in early language development is an important factor in later
vocabulary size. Monolingual infants learning a stress-initial language,
such as English, show segmentation abilities as young as 7.5 months. Little
is known about how segmentation abilities develop in bilingual infants
learning languages with different stress patterns. Event-related potential
(ERP) studies with monolingual infants have identified a word familiarity
effect as a marker for segmentation. From 200-900 ms familiarized words
elicit a larger negativity than unfamiliar words at 10 months, and a positive
effect at 7 months. We examined the developmental time course of segmentation abilities in infants learning two languages with similar but not identical stress-patterns, i.e., Welsh and British English. ERPs were recorded
from 19 monolingual and 23 bilingual infants between 7-10 months in a
familiarization-test paradigm. Infants heard 8 English sentences containing
a stress-initial word during familiarization, followed by 4 test sentences,
half of which contained the familiarized word. Monolingual and bilingual
infants showed an ERP familiarization effect that manifested differently
across development. Monolinguals exhibited a negative going effect that
changed in lateral distribution from bilateral at 7 months, to a more focused
left temporal effect at 10 months. In contrast, bilinguals showed an unclear
pattern with a change from a bilateral positivity at 7 months to bilateral
negativity at 10 months. The results suggest that although both populations
develop segmentation abilities at a similar time, the underlying processes
might differ.

G62
THE PEDIATRIC FUNCTIONAL NEUROIMAGING RESEARCH NETWORK (C-MIND): METHODS, PUBLIC DATABASE, AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS Jennifer Vannest1, Claire Sroka1, Vincent Schmithorst2, Gregory Lee1, Wagner Michael1, Rajagopal Akila1, Scott Holland1, C-MIND Authorship
Consortium; 1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 2Children’s Hospital
of Pittsburgh — Goal: The goal of this project was to create standardized

methods for acquisition and processing of pediatric neuroimaging data,
combining BOLD functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) with arterial spin labeling (ASL) perfusion (Schmithorst et al., 2014a). We focused on
developmental changes in neural substrates of receptive language function
from infancy to age 18 (Schmithorst et al., 2014b), making all data available
in a publicly-accessible database. Methods: 257 children ages 0-18 years
participated in the study. Infants and toddlers under age 3 were scanned
during natural sleep; older children participated in two imaging sessions;
one to collect structural and baseline perfusion data; the second included
ASL/BOLD fMRI scans using a passive-listening story processing task in

2015 Annual Meeting
all participants, and a sentence-picture matching task in children older than
7 (Vannest et al., 2014). Comprehensive neuropsychological assessments
were completed in all participants. Results: The public database including
de-identified data from 206 participants who completed all study sessions
is available online (research.cchmc.org/c-mind/). An initial sub-analysis
(Sroka et al., submitted) examined the relationship between activation
during the story processing task and standardized vocabulary scores in
(n=30) children ages 3 to 5. Adjusting for age, children with higher vocabulary scores showed increased left-lateralization and greater activation in
thalamus, hippocampus and left angular gyrus. Conclusion: It is feasible
to collect high-quality neuroimaging data in sleeping infants and awake
children as young as age 3; and to make this data publicly available. This
dataset can be used to explore brain-behavior relationships in a wider age
range than previously studied.

G63
RAPID AUDITORY PROCESSING IN ITALIAN INFANTS AT RISK
FOR LANGUAGE AND LEARNING IMPAIRMENT Chiara Cantiani1, Valentina Riva1, Caterina Piazza1,2, Roberta Bettoni1, Massimo Molteni1, Naseem
Choudhury3,4, Cecilia Marino5,6, April A Benasich3; 1Scientific Institute, IRCCS
Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 2Politecnico di Milano, Italy, 3Rutgers
University, Newark, USA, 4Ramapo College of New Jersey, Mahwah, USA, 5Centre
de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire en Santé Mental de Québec, Canada,
6
Université Laval, Québec, Canada — Infants’ ability to discriminate between
auditory stimuli differing in fundamental frequency and presented in rapid
succession (i.e. rapid auditory processing abilities [RAP]) has been shown
to reliably predict later language outcomes and also to be anomalous in
infants at familial risk for Language and Learning Impairment (LLI). This
study represents the first attempt to investigate RAP for two acoustic features (fundamental frequency and duration) in Italian infants at familial
risk for LLI (FH+). RAP skills of 23 FH+ Italian 6-month-olds and 32 control infants (FH−) were characterized via EEG/ERP using a double-deviant oddball paradigm. Pairs of tones were presented at a rapid rate (70ms
inter-stimulus interval); the deviant stimuli differed in either frequency or
duration. For a subset of the participants outcome measures of expressive
vocabulary were collected at 20-months-of-age via a parental questionnaire. Overall, the morphology of ERP responses differed for frequency
vs. duration deviants. Group differences favoring FH- infants were identified: in FH+ infants, the latency of the N250 peak was delayed and the
mean amplitude of the positive mismatch response was reduced, primarily
for the frequency condition and within the right hemisphere. Moreover,
both EEG measures differentiating FH+ and FH- groups at 6-months-ofage were correlated with expressive language scores at 20 months. Results
suggest that Italian infants with a first-degree relative affected by LLI show
atypical auditory processing. During rapid-rate presentation, discrimination of frequency change appears more difficult for FH+ infants. Preliminary data suggests that early RAP abilities in Italian infants predict to later
language skills.

G64
PREFRONTAL CORTEX AS A PROTECTIVE FACTOR IN READING: HOW THE BRAIN ENABLES READING COMPREHENSION
DESPITE LESS PROFICIENT DECODING Smadar Patael1, Emily Farris1,2,
Jessica Black3, Roeland Hancock1, John D.E. Gabrieli4, Laurie Cutting5,6, Fumiko
Hoeft1,6,7; 1University of California, San Francisco, 2University of Texas of the Permian Basin, 3Boston College, 4Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 5Vanderbilt
University, 6Haskins Laboratories, 7Keio University, Japan — Understanding
text is the ultimate goal of learning to read. To master reading comprehension, children have to first acquire decoding skills, the ability to translate
printed words into sounds. Surprisingly, some children struggle to read
(decode), but yet can comprehend text well (referred to as resilient dyslexics in the current study), but its brain basis is virtually unknown. Further,
it is unknown whether this brain mechanism allows the development of
comprehension-decoding discrepancy, or the brain pattern is a secondary
consequence of the enhanced use of compensatory strategies. Therefore,
the goal of our study was to examine the mechanism underlying this discrepancy. We found that increased regional grey matter volume (GMV)
in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (LtDLPFC) was specifically and

Poster Session G
positively-associated with greater discrepancy in a cross-sectional sample
of school-age children with a wide range of reading ability (N=55; Experiment-1a). Interestingly, a subsample of resilient dyslexics had increased
LtDLPFC GMV not only when compared to poor but also to good readers
without discrepancy (N=36; Experiment-1b). Further, increased LtDLPFC
GMV in pre-readers predicted greater discrepancy three years later (N=43;
Experiment-2). Finally, the role of this anatomical region was found to be
associated with cognitive control using large-scale reverse inference (Experiment-3). These findings point to a causal relationship between LtDLPFC
critical for working memory and planning, and superior comprehension
relative the child’s decoding skills. Studies such as ours may offer clues as
to how best support children with dyslexia and maximize their ability to
understand text despite decoding challenges.

G65
MULTIPLE CHANNELS OF COMMUNICATION AND CO-OCCURRENCES IN ADULTS WITH WILLIAMS SYNDROME Talent V. Dang1,
Philip Lai1,2,3, Judy Reilly3, Ursula Bellugi1; 1The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 2University of California, San Diego, 3San Diego State University — Williams

Syndrome (WS) is a genetic disorder, characterized by hyper-sociability
and gregariousness. The goal of this study is to better define the social
phenotype of adults with WS by analyzing multiple channels of communication and their co-occurrences during a dyadic interaction. Participants
included 14 individuals with WS and 11 typically developing (TD) individuals. Language, facial expression, eye contact, and their co-occurrences
were analyzed. Using facial expression in conjunction with speech, a negative correlation between age and smiles was observed in the TD group
(P=.048) while the WS group continue to smile regardless of age. The frequency of eye contact was significantly higher in the TD group (p=.004),
while the average duration of eye contact was significantly longer in the
WS group (p=.015). Co-occurrences of eye contact and facial expression
resulted in significant differences as the TD group produces more of these
two channels concurrently than the WS group. Although less frequent, the
co-occurrences observed in the WS group was significantly longer than the
TD group. We are beginning to observe different communication patterns
in which the WS group is more open to meeting new people, express frequent smiles, and engages in longer eye contact; the TD group has shorter,
yet more frequent eye contact and fewer smiles. These results are somewhat consistent with previous studies in children with WS, suggesting
aspects of their social phenotype persist into adulthood. Taken together,
these multiple channels of communication and their temporal dynamics
can better help define the adult WS social profile.

LANGUAGE: Syntax
G66
THE INFLUENCE OF L1 PROFICIENCY ON ERP INDICES OF SENTENCE PROCESSING Ella Dubinsky1, Lisa Beck1, Antoine Tremblay1, Aaron J
Newman1; 1Dalhousie University — We characterized individual differences in

event-related potential (ERP) responses to semantic and syntactic violations
in sentences, and investigated whether there are systematic relationships
between such differences and behavioural measures of cognitive-linguistic
abilities. We recorded ERPs from native English speakers in response to
written English sentences containing lexical-semantic, morphosyntactic, or
phrase structure violations, as well as control sentences. Language proficiency scores were obtained from the TOAL-3; other cognitive measures
including working memory and executive function were also obtained.
Mean amplitudes in the 300-500 (N400) and 600-800 (P600) ms windows
were analyzed using linear mixed effects modelling, with proficiency
measures included as continuous fixed effects terms. At the group level,
biphasic early negativity-late positivity patterns were observed for all three
violation types, although the scalp distribution varied with violation type.
In particular, the early negativity for morphosyntactic and phrase structure
violations was more left-lateralized than for lexical-semantic violations.
However, closer investigation revealed systematic differences in the magnitude and scalp distribution of these components as a function of language
proficiency. These findings contribute to a growing appreciation of the role
that individual differences play in modulating ERP responses to sentence

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

217

Poster Session G
processing. These results will be discussed in the context of characterizing
individual strategies to parsing and how other cognitive factors (e.g., working memory) may contribute.

G67
SLEEP FACILITATES LEARNING A NEW LINGUISTIC RULE Laura
Batterink1, Delphine Oudiette1, Paul J. Reber1, Ken A. Paller1; 1Northwestern
University — Natural languages contain countless regularities. Extraction

of these patterns is an essential component of language acquisition. Here
we examined the hypothesis that memory processing during sleep contributes to this learning. We exposed participants to a hidden linguistic rule
by presenting a large number of two-word phrases, each including a noun
preceded by one of four novel words that functioned as an article (e.g.,
gi rabbit). These novel articles were presented as obeying an explicit rule:
two articles signified that the noun referent was relatively near, and two
that it was relatively far. Undisclosed to participants was the fact that the
novel articles also predicted noun animacy, with two of the articles preceding animate referents and the other two preceding inanimate referents.
Rule acquisition was tested implicitly using a task in which participants
responded to each phrase according to whether the noun was animate or
inanimate. Learning of the hidden rule was evident in slower responses
to phrases that violated the rule. Responses were delayed regardless of
whether rule-knowledge was consciously accessible. Brain potentials provided additional confirmation of implicit and explicit rule-knowledge.
An afternoon nap was interposed between two 20-min learning sessions.
Participants who obtained greater amounts of both slow-wave and rapid-eye-movement sleep showed increased sensitivity to the hidden linguistic rule in the second session. We conclude that during sleep, reactivation
of linguistic information linked with the rule was instrumental for stabilizing learning. The combination of slow-wave and rapid-eye-movement
sleep may synergistically facilitate the abstraction of complex patterns in
linguistic input.

G68
HOW RIGHT IS LEFT? AN ERP STUDY ON THE EFFECTS OF HANDEDNESS ON GRAMMATICAL PROCESSING Sarah Grey1, Darren
Tanner2, Janet G. Van Hell1,3; 1Pennsylvania State University, 2University of Illinois
Urbana Champaign, 3Radboud University Nijmegen — We examined the effects

of handedness on grammatical processing. Research shows that righthanded participants with a left-handed blood relative (familial sinistrals)
process language differently from right-handers with no left-handed blood
relative (familial dextrals; Tanner & Van Hell, 2014; Townsend & Bever,
2001). Sinistrality is thought to be related to increased reliance on lexical/
semantic information whereas dextrals rely more on grammatical information (Townsend & Bever, 2001; Ullman, 2005), but how do left-handers process grammar? Because brain-based studies typically exclude left-handers
(Willems et al., 2014) little is known about the effects of handedness on
language processing. We tested left-handed individuals on grammatical
processing using ERPs, and compared their neural patterns to two groups
of right-handed participants: dextrals with a sinistral blood relative and
dextrals with no familial sinistrality. Participants read sentences that were
either correct or contained an error in English subject-verb agreement or
verb tense. For agreement, the right handers with a left-handed relative
showed a biphasic N400-P600 response whereas the left-handers and the
right-handers without a left-handed relative showed a P600. For tense, the
three groups showed different patterns: the dextrals with a left-handed
blood relative again had a biphasic N400-P600 response, the left-handers
group showed an N400, and the dextrals with no left-handed relatives
showed a P600. Overall, the results reveal similarities and differences in
reliance on lexical/semantic or structural information as a function of
handedness. In general, the right-handers with a left-handed relative
showed a biphasic N400-P600 whereas the other two groups showed an
N400 or a P600.

G69
THE ROLE OF THE BASAL GANGLIA IN LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION: AN ERP STUDY OF SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE (PD) Mieko Ueno1, Laura Kemmer2, Christopher Barkley1,
Marta Kutas1, Shugo Suwazono3, Vincent Filoteo1, Irene Litvan1; 1University of

218

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
California, San Diego, 2Pacific Lutheran University, 3National Hospital Organization Okinawa National Hospital — Recent work has demonstrated language

abnormalities in PD. Friederici et al. (2003), for example, reported reduced
P600 amplitudes -- an event related brain potential (ERP) component used
as an index of syntactic processing -- to word category violations in speech
in PD, and concluded that basal ganglia circuitry is crucial for late/integrative syntactic processes. We assess the generality of this conclusion by
examining the processing of grammatical number violations during reading combined with performance on an extensive neuropsychological battery. EEG was recorded while individuals with PD (Mean Hoehn and Yahr
stage=2.1; Mean MoCA=26.3) and age-matched controls read sentences
containing grammatical number violations with subject-verb and reflexive
pronoun-antecedent agreement (and grammatical controls). P600 effect
(violations minus controls) amplitudes and latencies were correlated with
various neuropsychological measures. Statistically indistinguishable centro-posterior P600 effects were observed in both groups. P600 parameters
were significantly correlated with Executive Function/Working Memory
(EF/WM) scores: higher scores were associated with earlier and larger P600
effects for both groups (PD: r=.8~.9; controls: r=.6~.7). We found no evidence for P600 effect amplitude reductions in individuals with PD with
severity approximately equal to that in previous reports. Preliminary analyses suggest that syntactic P600 amplitude and latency are better predicted
by scores on tests of EF/WM than grammaticality judgment accuracy in
PD. This suggests that the link between the basal ganglia and syntactic processing is more complicated than presumed to date.

G70
NATIVE WORD ORDER PROCESSING IS NOT UNIFORM: AN ERP
STUDY OF VERB-SECOND WORD ORDER Annika Andersson1, Susan
Sayehli1, Marianne Gullberg1; 1Lund University — Most Germanic languages
share verb-second (V2) word order: the finite verb occurs in second position in a main clause regardless of whether it starts with a subject (e.g.,
she; SVO), or an adverbial (e.g., today; AdvVSO). Swedish allows for certain exceptions to V2 resulting in clauses with V3 word order (AdvSVO)
(Bohnacker, 2006). Despite the general acknowledgment that V3 occurs,
little is known about the factors that license it and about how these structures are processed. This study therefore investigated V2-/V3-processing
in 20 adult native Swedish speakers, manipulating initial semantic adverbial type (idag ‘today’, hemma ‘at home’, and kanske ‘maybe’), and subject
type (lexical noun, ‘the boy’, vs. pronoun, ‘he’) in a sentence completion
task and in acceptability judgments made after event-related potentials
were recorded. The results showed effects of adverbial- and subject-type
across tasks and measures. Behavioral results showed positive effects of
pronominal subjects; moreover, idag-sentences were the most accurate, and
kanske-sentences the least accurate. Neurocognitively, there was a main
effect of V2 reflected in a medial negativity in the N400 time window, a left
anterior positivity, and a late posterior negativity. Importantly, the negativities were strongest in amplitude with kanske, while the left anterior
positivity was only elicited with hemma and idag. The results thus suggest
that V2-violations in Swedish are more acceptable with some adverbials
(here kanske ‘maybe’), and that such sentences are also processed differently from sentences starting with other adverbials. Native word order processing is thus not uniform.

G71
THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF AGRAMMATIC SENTENCE COMPREHENSION: A LESION STUDY Arianna La Croix1, Corianne Rogalsky1,
Kuan-Hua Chen2, Gretchen Hays1, Steven W. Anderson2, Hanna Damasio3, Tracy
Love4, Gregory Hickok5; 1Arizona State University, 2University of Iowa, 3University
of Southern California, 4San Diego State University, 5University of California Irvine — Broca’s area has long been implicated in sentence comprehension.

In particular, damage to this region is thought to be the central cause of
“agrammatic comprehension” in which performance is substantially worse
(and near chance) on sentences with noncanonical word orders compared
to canonical word order sentences (in English). The present study investigated this claim in 66 patients with chronic focal left hemisphere cerebral
damage. Patients completed two sentence comprehension measures, the
SOAP syntactic test (Love & Oster, 2003) and a plausibility judgment task.
Patients with damage to Broca’s area (and surrounding areas but excluding
the temporal lobe; n=11) on average did not exhibit the expected agram-

2015 Annual Meeting
matic comprehension pattern, e.g. their performance was > 80% on noncanonical sentences in the SOAP syntactic test. These findings are contrary
to the well-documented agrammatic performance of patients with Broca’s
aphasia. Across our entire patient sample, agrammatic comprehension is
associated with damage within a large left hemisphere network, in particular inferior frontal, anterior temporal and temporoparietal regions. To further characterize the networks involved in noncanonical versus canonical
sentence comprehension, we then performed voxel-based lesion symptom
mapping (VLSM) for each sentence type in each task across all 66 patients.
Coinciding with previous studies, the VLSMs identified a significant association between sentence comprehension and a large left temporal-inferior
parietal network for all sentences (peak t values were in posterior temporal
and inferior parietal voxels); no significant frontal regions were found for
any sentence type/task. Our findings suggest that a large left hemisphere
network supports sentence comprehension.

G72
NEURAL RESPONSES SHOW EFFECTS OF QUANTIFICATION
DURING PROCESSING OF AGREEMENT DEPENDENCIES Nyssa
Z. Bulkes1, Darren Tanner1; 1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign — Successful language comprehension requires the integration of grammatical
information across words, and in languages like English, this includes
processing subject-verb agreement. A goal for psycholinguistic theories
of agreement is to specify the range cues used during the formation of
agreement dependencies, the mechanisms that establish these dependencies, and the overlap (or divergence) in mechanisms responsible for processing agreement in language comprehension and production. Research
on language production using the attraction interference paradigm has
shown that plurally-quantified noun phrases (NPs; e.g., “most students”)
do not elicit a greater number of speech errors than noun phrases with nonnumber-marked determiners (e.g., “the students”), suggesting that overt
quantification provides no stronger cue to plurality than morphological
marking on the noun itself. Here we used ERPs to study how quantification
impacts comprehension of agreement at the neural level. Native English
speakers read sentences that were grammatical or contained a violation of
subject-verb agreement, where the subject NP was either overtly quantified
or contained an unmarked determiner (e.g., The/most students arrive/*arrives…). Results show a significantly larger P600 effect for ungrammatical
verbs following NPs with plural quantifiers versus unmarked determiners.
This suggests that, unlike in language production, quantification serves as
an additional cue for the encoding and processing of agreement information in comprehension, over and above plural marking on the noun. Our
results support recent theories of agreement comprehension that entail
both prediction and cue-based retrieval mechanisms, and which argue that
agreement processing mechanisms are non-identical in comprehension and
production (Tanner et al., 2014).

G73
INFLUENCE OF L1-L2 SIMILARITY, AOA, PROFICIENCY, IMMERSION ON L2 SYNTACTIC PROCESSING: AN EMPIRICAL REVIEW
ON AVAILABLE ERP RESULTS Sendy Caffarra1, Nicola Molinaro1,2, Doug
Davidson1, Manuel Carreiras1,2; 1BCBL, Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and
Language, Donostia, Spain, 2Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao,
Spain — Several factors have been considered influential on how the brain
acquires and computes second language grammar (i.e., L2 factors): L1-L2
similarity, age of acquisition (AoA), proficiency, and immersion duration
in a L2-speaking community. So far, ERP studies have investigated the
impact of each single factor on the time course of L2 parsing without taking
into account the relative contribution of all the others. The present work
attempts to provide a unified view on this topic by including all the L2
factors in a single empirical review. Forty-one ERP studies on L2 syntactic
processing were analyzed in order to establish whether functional specializations of distinct aspects of syntactic processing (i.e., eLAN, LAN, N400,
P600) would be equally influenced by the L2 factors or not. Logistic regression was performed on the published ERP results elicited by syntactic violations in L2, including the L2 factors as independent categorical variables.
In this way, we identified the relative contribution of each L2 factor on the
percentage of published ERP effects. Results showed that a higher number
of LAN effects has been reported when immersion in the L2 country lasted
more than 5 years, and more P600 effects has been reported at a high level

Poster Session G
of L2 proficiency. Thus, distinct aspects of syntactic processing are differently influenced by the L2 factors: duration of immersion is particularly
influential on early automatic syntactic processes, and proficiency level
plays an important role on late controlled processes.

G74
MORPHO-SYNTACTIC PROCESSING IN LATE BILINGUALS: CONVERGING EVIDENCE FROM ERPS AND TIME-FREQUENCY REPRESENTATIONS (TFRS) Yanina Prystauka1,2, Eleonora Rossi2; 1Center for
Mind/Brain Sciences Trento University, 2Penn State University — One important

debate in the bilingualism literature is how grammatical similarity between
the native (L1) and second language (L2) impacts the neurophysiological
bases of L2 processing. Here, we utilize a novel approach by converging
Event Related Potentials (ERPs) and Time-Frequency Representations analyses, to reveal changes of oscillatory neuronal activity over time during
morpho-syntactic processing. Specifically, we investigate clitic pronouns
processing in native Spanish (n=20) and advanced English-Spanish bilinguals (n=22). Importantly, clitics are a unique Spanish grammatical structure which encodes grammatical gender (a unique L2 feature), and number
(shared instead between the two languages). EEGs were recorded while
participants read Spanish sentences containing gender and number violations on the clitic. Previous ERPs studies have reported that morpho-syntactic violations elicit a P600 component, while TFR research has related
morpho-syntactic processing to oscillatory neuronal activity in the alpha
(7-14Hz) and beta frequency (15-30Hz) ranges. Our time-domain results
reveal that both groups are sensitive to number violations (as shown by
an increased P600), while only a subset of native-like L2 speakers show
sensitivity to gender violations. Additionally, the time-frequency analysis
reveal that both L1 and L2 Spanish speakers show a decrease in the alpha
and beta bands as a response to gender and number violations. However,
the magnitude of this decrease is smaller in L2 speakers. Altogether, we
provide converging evidence that adult L2 speakers are sensitive to grammatical structures that are not encoded in their native language. Additional
analyses will aim to investigate the existence of the inverse relationship
between ERPs and TFRs.

G75
P600 EFFECTS IN LANGUAGE AND MUSIC Nicole E. Calma1, Laura
Staum-Casasanto2, Dan Finer1, Robbin Miranda3, Michael T. Ullman4, John E.
Drury1; 1Stony Brook University, 2University of Chicago, 3Infinimetrics Corporation, 4Georgetown University — Whether language/music involve shared/

distinct neurocognitive mechanisms remains a topic of debate (Patel 2003,
Peretz & Coltheart 2003). In ERP interference studies, interaction patterns involving anterior negativities (LAN/RAN effects) have been found
when linguistic/musical syntax are simultaneously disrupted (Koelsch et
al 2005), consistent with shared resources. However, whether the mechanisms underlying other ERP components (e.g., N400/P600) may be shared
across domains remains undetermined. Our previous work tested familiar
and unfamiliar melodies (from Miranda & Ullman 2007) containing musical syntactic violations (out-of-key notes) with simultaneous presentation
of sentences containing linguistic-semantic violations (“…the ball John
will KICK/#BAKE…”). In that study, P600 effects elicited by simultaneous
music-syntactic and linguistic-semantic violations were subadditive when
the melody was familiar/known (consistent with shared/overlapping
generators). In contrast, unfamiliar/novel melodies in double violations
yielded additive P600 effects (consistent with distinct underlying generators). Using the same set of familiar/unfamiliar melodies and correct target
sentences, the present study asked whether the same influence of melody
familiarity on language/music P600 interactions would arise with linguistic-syntactic violations (e.g., “…the ball John will KICK/*KICKED…”).
Strikingly, the same pattern of the influence of familiarity emerged as in
our first experiment, showing language/music P600 interactions for familiar melodies only. In light of these data, current models of shared/distinct
neural resources for language/music require refinement regarding precisely what is claimed to be shared/distinct between domains.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

219

Poster Session G

G76
NEURAL ACTIVATION IN CHILDREN WITH AND WITHOUT SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENTS DURING COMPLEX SENTENCE
PROCESSING Ronald Gillam1, Nick Wan1, Sandra Gillam1, Allison Hancock1; 1Utah State University — Children with and without specific language

impairment (SLI) were imaged with Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS)
as they performed complex sentence comprehension tasks. The research
question was, “Do children with SLI recruit the same brain areas with the
same extent, variability and speed as typically developing, age-matched
controls during syntactic processing tasks.” Fifteen children with SLI (ages
8;9 to 11;11) and 15 age-matched, typically-developing controls were asked
to point to a picture representing the agent in on of 4 types of sentences:
SVO, SR, PAS, and OR. Sixty sentences (15 per condition) were pseudorandomized into 3 blocks of 20 sentences each with an 8 sec presentation
and response interval. For the behavioral data, there was a Group main
effect, a Condition Main Effect, and a Significant Condition x Group interaction, F(3,66) = 3.45, p < .05. Children with SLI were much less accurate
than the age-matched controls on the noncanonical (PAS and OR) tasks, but
they were not reliably slower. For the NIRS data, children in both groups
had significantly greater activation in the left inferior parietal lobule for
canonical sentences as compared to noncanonical sentences. In addition,
children with SLI had significantly greater activation in the left inferior
parietal lobule than their typically-developing peers for all sentence types.
Children with SLI may be making up for syntactic deficits by activating
cortex that is usually associated with controlled attention and procedural
memory. These results are consistent with Chomsky’s theory of syntactic
comprehension and neural inefficiency explanations of SLI.

G77
NEURAL CORRELATES OF SYNTACTIC MOVEMENT Eduardo Europa1,
Cynthia K. Thompson1; 1Northwestern University — Syntactic movement is a

psycholinguistic concept referring to the displacement of sentence constituents to argument (NP-movement) or non-argument positions (Wh-movement) within sentences (Chomsky, 1981, 1986, 1995). Previous research
has shown that comprehension of complex sentences with Wh-movement
(e.g., object-cleft sentences) and NP-movement (e.g., passive sentences)
elicits activation in overlapping, but distinct left-lateralized networks that
include the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
(Thompson et al., 2010; Mack et al., 2013). The purpose of this study was
to directly compare the neural correlates of these two movement types.
Functional MRI data were acquired from 13 healthy adults (mean age=27.7
years, SD=3.3) during comprehension of noncanonical (e.g., passive and
object-cleft) and canonical sentences (e.g., active and subject-cleft) via an
auditory sentence-picture verification task. Similar to previous studies, a
main effect of canonicity was found for noncanonical sentences in bilateral
frontal cortex and left TPJ. Wh-movement (object-cleft>subject-cleft) over
NP-movement (passive>active) resulted in activation in bilateral IFG and
insula and left MFG, however no activation was found for NP-movement
over Wh-movement. These results suggest that processing Wh-movement
requires greater neural resources than processing NP-movement. These
findings are in line with both representational and processing accounts of
the two sentence types in that Wh-, but not NP-, movement structures cross
clausal boundaries, with moved constituents occupying a non-argument,
rather than an argument, position. Wh-movement structures also engage
greater working memory demands. Further research is required to clarify
the differences between the movement types.

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
G78
STRATEGIC RETRIEVAL PROCESSES INVOLVED IN ENCODING
NEW INFORMATION David Amadeus Vogelsang1,2, Zara M. Bergström3,
Charan Ranganath4,5, Jon S. Simons1,2; 1Department of Psychology, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EB, UK, 2Behavioural and Clinical
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 3School of Psychology, Keynes
College, University of Kent, 4Center for Neuroscience, University of California,
Davis, 5Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis — Optimal

220

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
retrieval of studied information requires goal-directed retrieval orientation to increase retrieval success. However, it is unresolved how orienting retrieval towards different types of information affects the processing
of new information that might also be encountered during a memory test
phase. We applied subsequent memory analysis to EEG and fMRI data
to study how different retrieval orientations influence incidental encoding of new information. Participants encoded information in both a deep
semantic and shallow phonological task and were tested in a subsequent
blocked memory test to examine how orienting retrieval towards these different types of information influences encoding of new words that were
presented as foils during the memory test phase. Despite the fact that the
only difference between the foils was the type of information that was targeted during retrieval, recognition memory for foils, assessed in a later
second memory test phase, revealed that attempting to retrieve semantic
rather than phonological information led to better encoding of new words,
resulting in better subsequent recognition of semantic foils than phonological foils. Subsequent memory analysis of EEG data demonstrated that
semantic and phonological foils elicited distinct parietal effects during the
first memory test. Different patterns of fMRI activity were also observed,
enabling a comparison across imaging modalities regarding the spatiotemporal characteristics of the foil recognition effect. The behavioural results
converge with the novel neuroimaging data providing further support for
the hypothesis that strategically orienting retrieval towards new semantic
versus phonological information leads to different neural representations
that are predictive of subsequent memory.

G79
INTER-INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN NEURAL CORRELATES OF
LONG-TERM MEMORY FORMATION DURING WORKING MEMORY
MAINTENANCE Axel Mecklinger1, Florian Beier1, Emma Bridger1; 1Saarland
University; Germany — Maintaining information in working memory (WM)

can support long-term memory (LTM) formation, particularly during the
initial stage of WM maintenance relative to later stages. Disrupting initial
stages of WM thus disproportionally impairs subsequent LTM performance (Ranganath et al., 2005). Here we investigated whether this pattern
and corresponding event-related potentials (ERPs) interact with individual
differences in working memory capacity (WMC), given that individuals
with higher WMC should have more resources for LTM formation during
WM tasks (Unsworth & Engle, 2007). Brain potentials were recorded from
high (n=15) and low (n=13) WMC individuals processing a visual delayedmatch-to-sample task, with an interference task which disrupted either the
early or late delay phase. In a subsequent surprise recognition task, both
groups showed enhanced LTM performance for the late compared to the
early interference condition, as well as a centrally-distributed late ERP
old/new effect, the putative neural correlate of recollection. During WM
maintenance, the high WMC group revealed sustained occipitally-distributed positive slow wave activity which was larger for items subsequently
remembered in the recognition task than forgotten items. For the high
WMC group this effect was present in the early but not in the late interference condition. For low WMC individuals it was absent in both interference
conditions. These results provide general support for dual stage models of
WM maintenance. They also indicate that different processes supporting
LTM formation are engaged in individuals with high relative to low WMC
particularly during early stages of WM maintenance which are of high relevance for successful LTM formation.

G80
MOOD INFLUENCES THE SELECTIVITY OF SLEEP-DEPENDENT
MEMORY CONSOLIDATION Aaron L. Grady1, Christopher A. Hawkins1,
Haleigh Winfrey1, Maria Czyzewska1, Carmen E. Westerberg1; 1Texas State University — Long-term memory is selective. Whereas some memories appear to
last a lifetime, others are soon forgotten. It is hypothesized that covert reactivation of specific memories during sleep facilitates consolidation of these
memories and contributes to this selectivity. Here, we tested whether mood
could influence the selectivity of sleep-dependent consolidation. Half of the
participants were assigned to the sad group and the other half to the happy
group. After listening to a short story that included both happy and sad
events in a neutral mood, participants then listened to music while imagining themselves in various scenarios to induce either a happy or a sad
mood. Mood assessments obtained before and after the induction proce-

2015 Annual Meeting
dure confirmed its effectiveness. Participants then took a 90-min nap while
mood-consistent music was played to reactivate the previously induced
mood state (happy or sad). Upon waking, free recall for story events was
tested, and a final mood assessment indicated that mood had returned to a
neutral level for both groups at recall. Participants in the sad group recalled
significantly more sad events than happy events, whereas the happy group
recalled an equivalent number of happy and sad events. Furthermore, in
the sad group, multiple aspects of sleep physiology predicted the extent
of sad events recalled upon waking, implicating sleep-dependent consolidation in the memory facilitation for sad events. These results suggest that
mood state can influence which memories gain access to sleep-dependent
consolidation processes, and could have implications for understanding
and treating mood disorders.

G81
CHRONIC MEDIA MULTITASKING AND DISTRACTION: NEURAL
SUBSTRATES AND MNEMONIC CONSEQUENCES Melina Uncapher1,
Monica Thieu1, Anthony D Wagner1,2; 1Dept of Psychology, Stanford University,
2
Neurosciences Program, Stanford University — Chronic multitasking with

media has been associated with various cognitive differences, including
poor distractor filtering and reduced use of top-down goal information.
Recent data further indicate that heavy media multitaskers’ (HMMs) deficits in working memory (WM) extend to long-term memory (LTM). At present, the neural bases of media multitasking-related cognitive differences
is not yet known. Here we investigated media multitasking-related differences during perceptual filtering, and whether these differences influence
neural encoding of LTMs. We tested the hypothesis that HMMs, relative to
light MMs (LMMs), are more heavily biased toward bottom-up attention
capture of irrelevant information, reducing the fidelity of relevant information in WM and LTM. FMRI data were collected while 40 participants
(HMMs=20, LMMs=20) performed a semantic decision task on visually
presented words in the presence of occasional distracting images. Participants were later given a surprise recognition memory test for target words
and distractor images. Univariate analyses revealed that the ventral frontoparietal network associated with the bottom-up capture of attention was
more reactive in HMMs; specifically, left temporoparietal junction (TPJ)
was more active in the presence of distractors in HMMs relative to LMMs.
Furthermore, HMMs’ susceptibility to distraction had carry-forward consequences for long-term memory (LTM): HMMs showed reduced memory
for the target information encountered during the semantic decision task.
Together these findings suggest that heavy media multitaskers’ susceptibility to distraction may derive from a more reactive ventral attention network, thus yielding lower fidelity perceptual representations of relevant
information, which in turn lead to lower fidelity LTM representations.

G82
HIPPOCAMPAL AND MEDIAL PREFRONTAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO
ITEM AND CONTEXT MEMORY OVER TIME Maureen Ritchey1, Andrew P.
Yonelinas1, Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — A contentious

issue in memory research is whether hippocampal and neocortical contributions to episodic retrieval change as memories age. Some models predict
that hippocampal involvement will decrease over time whereas neocortical
contributions (such as in medial prefrontal cortex, or mPFC) will remain
stable or even increase over time. However, it is unclear whether delay
effects might be related to differences in the retention of context information in memory. In this study, we used fMRI to compare hippocampal and
mPFC contributions to immediate and one-day delayed retrieval, measuring responses during item recognition and the discrimination of intact and
recombined context associations. The results showed that both the anterior
hippocampus and mPFC were involved in item recognition immediately
and after a delay, whereas the posterior hippocampus was involved only
immediately. The anterior hippocampus additionally showed activity that
discriminated between intact and recombined associations during both
tests, whereas the medial PFC discriminated among context associations
only after a delay. These findings suggest that the anterior and posterior
hippocampus play different roles in item recognition over time. In addition, delay-dependent changes in mPFC involvement are not common
across all forms of memory, but rather, context retrieval in particular may
become increasingly dependent on mPFC representations over time.

Poster Session G

G83
PERSONAL SEMANTICS ARE DISTINCT FROM EPISODIC AND
SEMANTIC MEMORY: AN ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDY OF
MEMORY FOR REPEATED EVENTS AND AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL
FACTS. Louis Renoult1, Annick Tanguay2, Myriam Beaudry2, Paniz Tavakoli2,
Sheida Rabipour2, Kenneth Campbell2, Morris Moscovitch3, Brian Levine3, Patrick S.R. Davidson2; 1University of East Anglia, UK, 2University of Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada, 3Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, Canada —
Declarative memory consists of two independent systems: episodic and
semantic memory. Episodic memory represents memories of personal
and contextually unique events, while semantic memory represents culturally-shared and acontextual factual information. Intermediate forms of
memory such as memories of repeated personal events (RE) and of personal facts (PF) are commonly referred to as personal semantics but have
been studied little and rarely compared to both semantic and episodic
memory. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded in 27 participants
while they verified the veracity of sentences probing the 4 types of memory:
general (semantic) facts, PF, RE, and unique (episodic) events. Behavioral
results showed equivalent reaction times in all 4 conditions. True sentences
were verified faster than false sentences, except for unique events for
which no significant difference was observed. Electrophysiological results
showed that the N400, associated with retrieval from semantic memory,
was maximal for general facts, intermediate for PF and RE, and minimal for
unique events. A mirrored pattern was observed for the LPC, associated
with retrieval from episodic memory: it was maximal for unique events,
intermediate for personal facts and repeated events, and minimal for general facts. RE and PF did not differ significantly from each other but their
corresponding scalp distribution differed from those of general facts and
unique events. Our results show that the neural correlates of AF and RE can
be dissociated from those of semantic and episodic memory but that these
two forms of personal semantics generate similar patterns of brain activity
in a sentence verification task.

G84
HOW THE MTL REPRESENTS SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CONTEXTS: A HIGH-RESOLUTION MRI INVESTIGATION Halle Zucker1,
Maureen Ritchey1, Arne D. Ekstrom1, Andy P. Yonelinas1, Charan Ranganath1;
1
University of California, Davis — Theories of medial temporal lobe (MTL)

function suggest that the hippocampus supports memory for item-context
associations, but the roles of different hippocampal subfields remain controversial. It is debated whether subfields support memory via pattern completion and separation processes involving differential coding for spatial
versus temporal contexts in CA3 and CA1 or if both subfields participate
similarly in spatial and temporal contextual representation. In this study,
we used high-resolution imaging to investigate how MTL subregions code
for spatial and temporal information during episodic memory retrieval.
Participants engaged in a virtual reality encoding task where they learned
200 unique objects in one of two spatial contexts. At encoding, trials were
divided into 20 lists (temporal contexts). We then used high-resolution
(1.5 mm isotropic voxels) fMRI during an object recognition test to assess
activity related to recollection of the context associated with each studied
object. Additionally, participants completed a spatial source memory task
to validate subjective recollection decisions. Object-recognition accuracy
approached 75%, and objects rated as recollected were associated with
higher source accuracy. Preliminary fMRI analyses revealed enhanced activation throughout the MTL for correctly recognized items. Further analyses will use a multivariate pattern similarity approach to reveal the extent
to which spatial versus temporal context is associated with specific subfields or shared patterns across subfields.Thus, we will test the prediction
that both CA3/DG and CA1 carry information about spatial and temporal
contexts versus that CA3/DG codes for information about spatial context
and CA1 temporal context.

G85
INVESTIGATING THE ARCHITECTURE OF SHORT-TERM MEMORY
IN SEVERELY AMNESIC PATIENTS WITH HIPPOCAMPAL DAMAGE
David E. Warren1, Melissa C. Duff1, Daniel Tranel1; 1University of Iowa — Hippocampal damage is widely believed to produce focal long-term memory
Cognitive Neuroscience Society

221

Poster Session G
deficits, but recent investigations indicate that hippocampal damage can
also impair performance on tasks that do not explicitly require long term
memory. In particular, hippocampal damage may reduce the probability
that information can be retained even across very short delays (Warren et
al., 2014). To investigate this further, we tested the performance of hippocampal amnesic patients (N=4), patients with left temporal lobectomies
affecting hippocampus (LTL; N=3), brain-damaged comparison participants (BDC; N=10), and healthy normal comparison participants (NC;
N=10) using a short-term memory task. The task was adapted from previous work (Nee & Jonides, 2011), and tested memory for short word lists
(6 words/list) presented serially and rapidly (500 ms/word). Recognition
memory for a probe word was tested 300 ms after the final word. We analyzed recognition performance as a function of the probe’s serial position,
and found that severely amnesic participants with bilateral hippocampal
damage had reduced recognition performance (measured with d′) whether
all serial positions were considered (p=0.01) or only the most recent three
(p=0.02). Intriguingly, left temporal lobectomy including hippocampus did
not reduce performance to the same extent. These results are consistent
with the proposition that bilateral hippocampal damage reduces the probability that recently studied information is available at later test, even when
memory loads are low and study-test intervals are very short. If upheld,
these findings would suggest that hippocampus contributes to on-line task
performance, which has implications for theories of memory, aging, and
neurological disease.

G86
ADAPTIVE TASK DIFFICULTY INFLUENCES FUNCTIONAL NEUROPLASTICITY IN COGNITIVE TRAINING Kristin Flegal1, J. Daniel Ragland1,
Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California, Davis — Progress in cognitive

training research requires a mechanistic understanding of the factors that
promote transfer of training gains, and their relationship to cognitive and
neural plasticity. Adaptive task difficulty is a potential mediator of training and transfer effects, as adaptivity is predicted to facilitate more efficient processing by creating a prolonged mismatch between the supply
of, and the demand upon, available neural resources. This hypothesis was
tested in a study consisting of 3 weeks of computerized working memory
updating (WMU) training, with pre-, early-, and post-training fMRI sessions including untrained WMU (near transfer) and episodic memory (far
transfer) tasks. Participants were assigned either to an Adaptive training
condition, in which practiced WMU tasks dynamically increased in difficulty, or to a Non-Adaptive active control condition. Participants additionally completed a battery of untrained transfer tasks pre- and post-training.
Behavioral data showed that participants in both conditions improved
on untrained WMU tasks, but transfer effects were significantly larger on
an episodic memory task following adaptive than non-adaptive training.
Furthermore, training gains within the Adaptive condition were significantly associated with larger transfer effects to unpracticed WMU tasks.
fMRI analyses indicated that striatal activation decreases in a trained WMU
task were significantly larger for adaptive than non-adaptive training, and
training gains within the Adaptive condition were significantly associated
with hippocampal activation changes in untrained transfer tasks. Results
from this study relate adaptive task difficulty to broader transfer of training
gains—including far transfer to episodic memory—and greater functional
neuroplasticity.

G87
BASAL CORTISOL LEVELS AND STRESS-INDUCED CORTISOL
RESPONSES ARE DIFFERENTIALLY RELATED TO PROCESSES
UNDERLYING RECOGNITION MEMORY Andrew M. McCullough1, Maureen Ritchey1, Charan Ranganath1, Andrew P. Yonelinas1; 1University of California, Davis — It is well established that stress can affect memory processing,

and these effects are mediated in part by cortisol levels. Yet very different
relationships have been observed between cortisol and memory across
studies. Understanding exactly how cortisol levels and stress influence
memory-related processes has broad implications for research domains
including post-traumatic and chronic stress, as well as age-related memory
deficits. Previous work suggests that recognition memory performance
is supported by recollection and familiarity, processes that have distinct
neural substrates, and thus which may be differentially influenced by
stress and cortisol. We examined the effects of post-encoding stress on rec-

222

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
ognition memory using a cold-pressor task, and measured cortisol levels
before and after the encoding and stress tasks. Memory was tested 24 hours
after encoding. Hierarchical regression analyses revealed that basal cortisol levels were negatively related to estimates of recollection (r2 = .14)
and familiarity (r2 = .07). In contrast, the magnitude of cortisol response
to stress was differentially related to recollection and familiarity estimates,
such that recollection had an inverted-U relationship with the magnitude
of cortisol response (r2 = .19), while familiarity estimates increased linearly
with the cortisol responses (r2 = .07). This dissociation of the effects of cortisol on recollection and familiarity is likely related to different properties
of the brain regions underlying those processes, and it suggests that one
source of mixed evidence in the literature is the varying degree to which
different memory tests are supported by recollection and familiarity.

G88
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY-BASED PARCELLATION OF THE
HUMAN MEDIAL TEMPORAL LOBE Shao-Fang Wang1, Maureen Ritchey1,
Laura A Libby1, Charan Ranganath1; 1University of California at Davis, Davis, CA
95618, USA — Regional differences in large-scale connectivity have been
proposed to underlie functional specialization along the anterior-posterior
axis of the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus (PHG). However, it is
unknown whether functional connectivity can be used reliably to parcellate
the hippocampus and PHG into discrete functional units. The current study
aimed to differentiate subregions of the hippocampus and PHG based on
whole-brain resting-state functional connectivity. Functional connectivity
maps were calculated for each slice along the longitudinal axis of the PHG
and hippocampus. A hierarchical clustering algorithm was then applied to
these data in order to group slices according to the similarity of their functional connectivity profiles. In the PHG, three discrete clusters were identified. Two of the clusters corresponded to parahippocampal and perirhinal
cortex, and these regions showed preferential connectivity with previously
described posterior-medial and anterior-temporal networks, respectively.
The third cluster corresponded to an anterior perirhinal region that exhibited preferential connectivity with auditory cortical areas and also with a
network involved in visceral processing. In the hippocampus, three clusters
approximately corresponding to hippocampal head, body, and tail were
identified, but differences in whole-brain connectivity between these clusters were more graded than differences observed between PHG clusters.
These results indicate that connectivity-based methods can be used to parcellate regions within the MTL. Further analyses will test for task-related
functional differences among these regions.

G89
TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF EPISODIC MEMORY FORMATION INVESTIGATED THROUGH REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL
MAGNETIC STIMULATION. Giulia Galli1,2, Matteo Feurra2,3, Enea Francesco Pavone2,4, Simone Rossi2; 1Kingston University (UK), 2Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese (Italy), 3Moscow Higher School of Economics (Russia), 4Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS (Italy) — Successful memory formation relies on
brain activity set in train immediately before and during the encoding of
an information or event. However, the impact of post-stimulus processing
on successful encoding is still largely unknown. In this study, we used an
interference approach with repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
(r-TMS) to assess whether post-stimulus processing is relevant for the formation of a long lasting, episodic memory trace. During memory encoding,
we delivered r-TMS at different time intervals after stimulus presentation,
and assessed memory performance in a subsequent memory test. In a
between subjects design, r-TMS at different time intervals was delivered
either to the dorsolateral (DLPFC) or to the ventrolateral (VLPFC) prefrontal cortex, which have both been implicated in memory formation as shown
by fMRI studies. In addition, in order to vary the strength of the memory
trace, we used a Levels of Processing approach. The results showed that
when r-TMS was applied immediately after stimulus offset, subsequent
memory performance was significantly impaired. This finding was evident
for stimuli learnt under deep encoding conditions, and when the brain
stimulation was delivered to the VLPFC. These findings suggest that, at
least for strong memory traces, post-stimulus processing in the VLPFC is
crucial for memory formation, perhaps even more than online processing.
Post-stimulus processing may involve unintentional rehearsal that occurs

2015 Annual Meeting
immediately after stimulus offset and affects the likelihood that the stimulus is later remembered, as suggested by an influential model of memory
formation.

G90
VISUALS MAKE NARRATIVES MORE MEMORABLE AND EFFECTIVELY DRIVE BRAIN RESPONSES Samantha Cohen1, Jason J. Ki2, Lucas
C. Parra2; 1The Graduate Center at the City University of New York, 2The City College
of New York — In our media dominated culture narratives are increasingly

communicated with images that illustrate their contents. We wondered to
what extent do audiovisual presentations facilitate memory for the contents
of a story. We hypothesized that visual context added to an auditory narrative will more effectively drive brain responses and therefore result in
improved recall. To test this we presented autobiographical narratives with
and without accompanying animations and measured electro-encephalographic responses, and subsequently tested recall of factual information
3 weeks later. We found that audiovisual narratives were recalled more
effectively than the identical story presented as audio alone for all 10 stories
tested. Surprisingly, this benefit was equally strong when the animations
were scrambled in time. As predicted, these benefits correlated strongly
with the reliability of brain responses across subjects. Indeed, those subjects, among the 43 we recorded, who showed more reliable responses also
recalled story elements better. A possible explanation for these results is
that audiovisual stimuli effectively engage attention making the story more
memorable, even when the visuals do not contribute any factual information.

G91
THE ENCODING–RETRIEVAL MATCH PRINCIPLE AND THE DIAGNOSTIC VALUE OF THE RETRIEVAL CUE: AN EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIAL (ERP) STUDY Inês Bramão1, Mikael Johansson1; 1Department
of Psychology, Lund University, Sweden — The present study investigated con-

ditions yielding beneficial effects of context on episodic memory retrieval.
An influential idea in the literature is that memory performance benefits
when a retrieval cue matches contextual features of the originally encoded
episode. However, recent studies suggest that what improves memory performance is not the encoding-retrieval match per se, but instead the presence of diagnostic features in the retrieval context that help to discriminate
the target memory from competing memories. To test this prediction, we
constructed a novel paradigm where the diagnostic value of the context
and the encoding-retrieval match were manipulated in an associative recognition memory task. Participants were asked to memorize pairs of words
presented together with a unique or a non-unique background photograph
of outdoor scenes (i.e. diagnostic versus non-diagnostic contexts). At test,
participants were asked to recognize the word pairs in the presence or
absence of the previously encoded contexts. Behavioral data showed that
memory performance improved in the presence of the original context, but
importantly, only when the contextual cues were diagnostic of the target
memory trace. The electrophysiological data mirrored this finding and
showed an encoding-retrieval match effect in ERPs associated with diagnostic contextual cues, but not in the ERPs associated with non-diagnostic
contextual cues. Taken together, the present results underscore the importance of the diagnostic value of the retrieval cue, and further suggest that
the typically observed beneficial effects of an encoding-retrieval match may
be impeded due to interference from competing episodic memories.

G92
STATES OF CURIOSITY BENEFIT LATER RECOLLECTION OF INCIDENTAL INFORMATION Matthias Gruber1, Yonelinas Andrew2, Ranganath
Charan1; 1Center for Neuroscience, UC Davis, USA, 2Department of Psychology,
UC Davis, USA — In everyday life, learning is often driven by curiosity, but

the neurocognitive mechanisms of how curiosity affects learning are poorly
understood. In a recent study (Gruber et al., 2014, Neuron), participants
showed improved recall of information that they were curious about, and
also enhanced recognition accuracy for incidental, unrelated faces learned
during states of high curiosity. The findings suggest that high-curiosity
states might be conducive to learning of even neutral information. Additional fMRI findings indicated that the SN/VTA and hippocampus support
such incidental memory benefits. However, the previous study could not

Poster Session G
address which specific type of memory underlies curiosity-related recognition benefits for incidental information. Here, in a series of behavioral
experiments, we ask how recollection and familiarity contribute to such
curiosity-driven memory enhancements. First, participants rated their curiosity on a series of trivia questions. Then, participants learned the answers
to selected trivia questions. A trial started with the presentation of a trivia
question and participants anticipated the associated answer during a delay.
Critically, an unrelated face stimulus was presented during this anticipation period. In this way, participants incidentally encoded faces during
high- and low-curiosity states. Then, memory for the faces was tested by
using a modified Remember/Know recognition memory test allowing
us to dissociate between recollection- and familiarity-based recognition
memory. Preliminary analyses revealed that curiosity-driven memory benefits are supported by recollection rather than familiarity. Further analyses
will investigate the content and temporal characteristics of curiosity-driven
memory benefits for incidental information.

G93
ENCODING AND RETRIEVAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO MEMORY
ERRORS Lisa A. Solinger1, Elizabeth F. Chua1,2; 1Brooklyn College of the City
University of New York, 2The Graduate Center of the City University of New York —
We used eye tracking and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
to test the hypothesis that irrelevant binding at encoding is associated with
hippocampal activity and subsequent memory errors, and retrieval monitoring and decision processes are needed to avoid these errors. Using a paradigm that resembles the board game, Memory, participants studied pairs
of objects presented in a 4x5 grid of 20 “cards” and, like the board game,
were instructed to remember where matching cards were located and,
unlike the board game, to remember which cards were turned over at the
same time. At test participants were shown a probe card and were asked
either, to find the “matching card”, or to find the card that they had studied
at the “same time” as the probe. Preliminary analyses of same time trials
show that correctly choosing the same time card and incorrectly choosing
the matching card showed greater activity in the right medial temporal lobe
(MTL) compared to choosing a distractor card, indicating similar encoding activity for trials that later led to hits and lures but not for misses. At
retrieval, correctly choosing the same time card showed greater activity in
posterior parietal cortex compared to incorrectly choosing the matching
card, indicating task appropriate retrieval processes that are important for
avoiding memory errors.

G94
AN ERP INVESTIGATION OF THE NEUROCOGNITIVE MECHANISMS UNDERLYING THE SPACING EFFECT Alice S.N. Kim1,2, Audrey
M.B. Wong Kee You1, Binh Tam Le2, Melody Wiseheart1, Sylvain Moreno2, Shayna
Rosenbaum1,2; 1York University, 2Baycrest Hospital — In healthy and patient

populations, episodic memory benefits from the spacing effect, where
longer intervals (intervening items) between study repetitions enhances
long-term retention compared to massed repetition. However, few studies have investigated the mechanisms underlying this effect. In this study,
two groups of 15 healthy, young adults were tested in an ERP experiment,
during which participants were instructed to learn pairs of words for a subsequent memory test. Each group performed one of two encoding tasks,
which either required study-phase retrieval or not. During the study phase,
repeated pairs were separated by 0, 4, or 12 intervening pairs, corresponding to a massed condition and two levels of spacing, respectively. During
the test phase, participants were tested on paired-associate recall. Betweengroup analyses indicated no differences in memory performance or ERP
data for the two encoding task groups. Data from the two groups were
thus collapsed for all subsequent analyses. A repeated-measures ANOVA
demonstrated a significant effect of spacing on memory performance. Posthoc analyses showed significant improvement in memory performance as
spacing levels increased from 0 to 4, as well as 0 to 12, intervening pairs.
For the ERP data, the results of a partial least square analysis revealed a
significant effect of spacing that was most salient over the right frontal scalp
region. Larger spacing intervals (spacing levels 4 and 12) resulted in ERP
patterns that were more similar to ERPs elicited by the original presentation of a pair compared to its immediate repetition, suggesting a potential
role of neural fatigue.

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

223

Poster Session G

G95
EYE MOVEMENTS TO NOTHING SUPPORT MEMORY RETRIEVAL
IN THE BRAIN. Richard Dewhurst1, Roger Johansson1, Ines Bramão1, Mikael
Johansson1; 1Lund University, Sweden — A combined Event-Related Potential
and Eye Tracking experiment is described, with the aims of elucidating
the neural components subserving so called “looking at nothing” effects
on memory retrieval (e.g. Richardson, Altmann, Spivey, Hoover, 2009,
Johansson & Johansson, 2014). Participants performed a visual encoding
task designed to establish a deep episodic memory trace. They inspected
an array of 24 objects and were asked to remember as much as possible
about their spatial arrangement. In a subsequent retrieval phase participants were auditorily probed regarding the locations of the memorised
objects. Critically, they fixated within a now blank region of the display,
either congruent to the objects’ original location, or spatially dislocated
and incongruent. The results demonstrate that the facilitatory behavioural
effects of eye movement congurency, can be mapped onto the modulation
of posterior ERP slow waves, previously suggested to be associated with
re-construction and monitoring of episodic memory representations (e.g.
Johansson & Mecklinger, 2003). We argue that episodic memory retrieval is
an aspect of cognition embodied by eye-movements, not merely in an epiphenomenal sense. Looking at the right location gives rise to a greater overlap between encoding-, and retrieval-related neural activity, consequently
boosting memory performance in line with the encoding-retrieval match
principle (cf. Rugg, Park, & Uncapher, 2008) . To our knowledge, this if the
first demonstration of the neural profile of memory enhancement driven
solely by fixation location, in the absence of visual input.

G96
ERP CORRELATES OF EPISODIC CONTEXTUAL RETRIEVAL Marty
Fiati1, Peter Bright1; 1Anglia Ruskin University — Increasingly a small number
of regions within the parietal lobe referred to as the posterior parietal cortex
(PPC) have been implicated in episodic recollection. Involvement of the
PPC has been closely associated with successful memory recognition, and
it has been found to further support retrieval of fine multi-sensory features
within an episode. Late positive-going Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) arising from similar posterior parietal sites have typically been associated with
successful memory recollection, and the magnitude of these has also been
suggested to reflect binding of contextual information specified within an
episode. In the current study, ERPs were recorded while participants performed an episodic retrieval task in which they first identified previously
studied (Old) faces, and subsequently made binary context-based source
judgements denoting the location (left/right), voice (male/female), and
study task (pleasantness rating/celebrity judgement) that they had associated with each face at study. The ERPs for presentations of Old faces were
separated according to the accuracy of source judgements for the different
contexts, and were compared to ERPs of new faces. Source recollection was
associated with a late positivity (450ms-800ms) maximal over centro-parietal sites. The prediction that the magnitude of the parietal positivity
reflected source binding at retrieval was tested by comparing ERPs according to the number of accurate source memory judgments for each face.
Findings suggested that the differences between parietal ERPs co-varied
with number of source retrievals, supporting predictions, and furthermore
they did not vary with sensory modality of the retrieved contexts.

G97
CUED-RECALL PERFORMANCE AND RESTING-STATE FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY Tanya Jonker1, Jonathan Smallwood2; 1University of
Waterloo, 2University of York — In the present study, we examined the functional connectivity underlying correct responding on a cued-recall test
using category-exemplar word pairs. We related individual differences in
correct memory to resting-state functional connectivity maps, using the
default mode network hubs as seed regions. We found that accuracy on
the cued-recall test was related to (1) decoupling between the hippocampal
formation and the parietal cortex, and (2) stronger connectivity between
the hippocampal formation and the medial prefrontal cortex. These results
illustrate the functional architecture that supports effective episodic
retrieval and implicate the default mode network as a core neural system
that supports this basic aspect of human cognition.

2015 Annual Meeting

METHODS: Electrophysiology
G98
FACILITATION OF VISUAL SEARCH RESPONSE TIMES THROUGH
ANODAL AND CATHODAL TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT
STIMULATION IS DEPENDENT ON THE VISUAL QUALITY OF THE
STIMULUS Kyongje Sung1, Laura Bosley1, Barry Gordon1; 1The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine — Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)

has been shown to modulate neuronal activity. The effect of tDCS in the
visual domain has been conceptualized as either amplification (with anodal
current) or attenuation (with cathodal current) of the neuronal representations of stimuli. Given this construct, we tested the hypothesis that tDCS
during visual search would interact with target presence, task difficulty,
or visual quality of stimulus, which all modulate sub-processes of visual
search and resulting RTs. In experiment 1, in three sessions, healthy adults
(n=12) performed two identical search tests with target presence and task
difficulty factors. In each session, the first test was a baseline sham and the
second test was either anodal, cathodal, or another sham stimulation. The
effect of tDCS was measured by the RT difference between the two tests.
Only the anodal tDCS significantly reduced mean search RTs in experiment
1. There was no interaction between anodal stimulation and other task factors. In experiment 2 (n=16), we introduced visual quality manipulation
(dim vs bright) and tried to replicate the finding of experiment 1. Experiment 2 produced the same result with bright stimuli. However, when the
stimulus quality was poor, cathodal stimulation also improved search RTs,
indicating a significant interaction between type of tDCS and stimulus
quality. These findings suggest that the notion that anodal/cathodal tDCS
leads to amplification/attenuation of representations is an oversimplified
one. The electrophysiological mechanisms associated with reverse polarities of stimulation may be more similar than has been assumed.

G99
CORTICAL RESPONSES TO TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION DURING NON-RAPID EYE MOVEMENT SLEEP Olivia Gosseries1,
Jaakko O. Nieminen1, Francesca Siclari2, Melanie Boly1, Adenauer Casali3, Bradley R. Postle1, Marcello Massimini3, Giulio Tononi1; 1University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2University Hospital of Lausanne, 3University of Milan — Transcranial mag-

netic stimulation coupled to electroencephalography (TMS-EEG) allows for
directly and non-invasively stimulating the brain and recording the subsequent cortical response. Previous TMS-EEG studies have shown clear-cut
differences between conscious and unconscious conditions. When subjects
are unconscious, as in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep early in the
night (stage N3), anesthesia or coma, TMS typically triggers a stereotypical and local slow-wave response. When they are conscious, as in normal
wakefulness and rapid eye movement sleep (REM) sleep, brain responses
to TMS are long-lasting, widespread, complex, and differentiated. In this
study, we performed TMS-EEG during NREM sleep in stage 2 (N2) and N3
on 7 healthy participants. Brain activity was recorded using a 60-channel
TMS-compatible EEG and single-pulse TMS was applied (up to 285 pulses
per session) on the superior parietal cortex. After each TMS session (5 to
15 sessions per night), subjects were awakened to ask for a dream report.
TMS-EEG responses were analyzed using the global mean field amplitude
(GMFA), the perturbational complexity index (PCI), as well as time-frequency measures. Our results show that the TMS-EEG response during N3
is larger and slower than during N2 sleep. The GMFA is higher and PCI is
lower in N3 as compared to N2 sleep. Moreover, N3 recordings showed
activation at lower frequency bands after TMS as compared to N2 sleep.
Additionally, TMS-EEG responses vary depending on whether subjects do
or do not report a dream. TMS-EEG might provide valuable information for
characterizing neurophysiological fluctuations and levels of consciousness
within NREM sleep.

G100
EVALUATION OF A BRIEF NEUROMETRIC ASSESSMENT FOR
THE GENERATION OF ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL PROFILES IN
A SAMPLE OF OLDER ADULTS WITH MILD COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS Emily Cunningham1, Paul Kieffaber1; 1College of William and Mary —
The amount of time necessary to assess an individual along multiple elec-

224

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
trophysiological dimensions poses a significant limitation to the utility of
event-related-potential- (ERP-) based assessments in clinical settings. Kappenman and Luck (2011) have posited a solution to this problem, demonstrating the feasibility of assessing multiple independent ERP components
in parallel within a single task. Building on this work, we have developed
a tool for brief, extensive electrophysiological assessment. The primary aim
of the current study was to evaluate the feasibility and utility of this task
in the assessment of a sample of older adults with mild to moderate levels
of cognitive impairment (N = 30). Participants completed a simple computerized task, approximately 25 minutes in duration, which was designed to
elicit up to 9 ERPs (frequency MMN, gap MMN, P50 suppression, C1, N2pc,
visual MMN, P3, ERN, and LRP), and included measurement of eyes-open
and eyes-closed resting state activity. This task was well-tolerated in the
older adult sample, and allowed successful generation of multidimensional
profiles of electrophysiological activity. Results demonstrate that these
profiles may be used to successfully differentiate between individuals at
different levels of cognitive impairment, and preliminary analyses of these
profiles in conjunction with neuropsychological and volumetric data support the potential utility of this design in the identification/characterization
of groups or individuals.

G101
SPECTRAL WHITENING INFLUENCES OSCILLATORY DYNAMICS
AND BEHAVIOR IN HUMANS Torben Noto1, Bradley Voytek2; 1UCSD, 2UCSD
— Neural oscillations play a critical role in many brain functions, including
perception, memory, executive functioning, and emotion. The scale over
which neural oscillations operate spans the microscale local field potential
(LFP) of a local neuronal population to the macroscale electrocorticogram
(ECoG) and electroencephalogram (EEG). Oscillations have proved to be
a fundamental component of neural communication and network coordination, putatively through their interactions with local population spiking
activity via spike/field or phase/amplitude coupling (PAC). Importantly,
population spiking and the oscillatory frequency of a neuronal population
can be different from the spiking frequency of individual neurons in the
neural region generating the oscillation, however the interrelationship
between oscillatory coupling and PAC remains unclear. Across several
datasets, collected from multiple investigators—ranging from whole-cell
patch clamp with concurrent LFP to human subdural ECoG—we find that
temporally de-correlated spiking activity: 1) Is associated with a “flattening” (whitening) of the LFP and ECoG power spectral density; 2) Reduces
phase amplitude coupling; and, 3) Biases perceptual behaviors such that
ongoing shifts in the spectral shape predict trial-by-trial response times.
These results are supported by computational modeling and single-unit
in vivo patch-clamp and LFP data. Thus, we have outlined a pathway by
which spiking connects the biology of oscillatory mechanics to complex
behaviors in humans.

G102
SLEEP OSCILLATIONS AND THEIR RELATIONSHIP TO COGNITION
IN 3.5 AND 6.5 MONTH OLD NAPPING INFANTS Sue Peters1, Silvia
Ortiz-Mantilla1, April A. Benasich1; 1Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University - Newark — Sleep rhythms are thought to play an

integral role in infant brain development. Variability in sleep patterns may
serve as early biomarkers for several neurodevelopmental disorders. Two
promising potential predictors are the spectral microstructure components
of spindles and slow wave activity (SWA). These components have been
proposed as electrophysiological measures of brain maturation, and have
been linked to cognitive measures in school-aged children, adolescents,
and adults. The present study aims to characterize the microstructure of
non-REM daytime sleep, including slow wave and spindle neurophysiology and topography, using both cross-sectional and longitudinal groups
of typically developing infants at 3.5 and 6.5 months. Infant sleep dEEG
data (124 channels) were collected and analyzed using Matlab toolboxes
(i.e. SPM, FASST, EEGLAB). Concurrent standardized tests designed to
measure infant cognitive and language development were administered.
Twenty-eight sleep sessions were scored for NREM sleep stages using EEG
and behavioral data. Spectral analysis of NREM 2/3 sleep stages was completed on eight topographical regions, using spectral decomposition. The
occipital SWA power was higher than the frontal power at both ages. There
was a significant maturational increase in temporal theta power, which

Poster Session G
may be representative of the auditory cortical acoustic mapping that occurs
during the first year of life. A significant positive correlation between the
temporal theta amplitude and the cognitive score was seen at 3.5 months,
and may represent hippocampal activity. This research may lead to more
detailed studies of sleep microstructure including temporally-bounded
sensory information processing and possible links to emerging language
and cognitive abilities.

G103
FRONTAL LOBE EEG ASYMMETRY AND GENERALIZED ANXIETY
DISORDER Amanda Ng1, Mark Geisler1; 1San Francisco State University — Pre-

vious research has shown that individuals with depression exhibit a frontal
lobe asymmetry when performing non-stimulating tasks (Schaffer, Davidson, & Saron, 1983; Henriques & Davidson, 1991; Davidson, Marshall,
Tomarken, & Henriques, 2000). The left frontal lobe may specialize in the
expression of positive emotions and the propensity to engage in approach
behaviors, while the right frontal lobe may specialize in negative emotions
and withdrawal behaviors (Davidson, 1998). The current study examined
whether this frontal asymmetry was apparent for individuals with high or
low Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) symptoms when they performed
tasks that induce anxiety versus relaxation. We predicted there would be
reduced alpha power resulting in greater activation of the right frontal
lobe after completing an anxiety inducing task compared to a relaxation
task. Anxiety was induced with the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task
(PASAT) while relaxation was induced with a meditation task. Participants
also completed 2 minutes of Eyes Open (EO) and 2 minutes of Eyes Closed
(EC) three times during the experiment. The conditions were counterbalanced among the participants. Participants performed these five tasks
while EEG (F3, F4, and eye movement artifact) was recorded continuously.
Analysis included ten 1-second epochs from each condition. Preliminary
results showed greater activation of the right frontal lobe compared to the
left frontal lobe during the EC, Post-Anxiety condition. The Baseline and
Post-Relaxation conditions did not show cortical asymmetry for either the
EO or the EC condition.

G104
TDCS INCREASES CORTICAL EXCITABILITY: DIRECT EVIDENCE
FROM TMS-EEG Leonor Josefina Romero Lauro1, Mario Rosanova2, Giulia
Mattavelli1, Alberto Pisoni1, Nadia Bolognini1, Giuseppe Vallar1; 1Department of
Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical and
Clinical Sciences “L. Sacco”, University of Milano, Italy — Despite transcranial

direct current stimulation (tDCS) is increasingly used in experimental and
clinical settings, the neurophysiological underpinnings of its immediate
and delayed effects, and to what extent the stimulation of a given cerebral region may affect the activity of anatomically connected regions, still
remain unclear. In the present study, we used an integrated system of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation and Electroencephalography (TMS-EEG) to
explore local and global cortical excitability modulation during and after
active and sham tDCS. Single pulse TMS was delivered over the left posterior parietal cortex (PPC), before, during, and after 15 min of anodal tDCS
over the right PPC. EEG was concurrently recorded from 60 channels. For
each session, indexes of global and local cerebral excitability were obtained,
computed as global and local mean field power (Global Mean Field Power,
GMFP and Local Mean Field Power, LMFP) on mean TMS-evoked potentials (TEPs). The global index was computed on all 60 channels. The local
indexes were computed in six clusters of electrodes: left and right in frontal,
parietal and temporal regions. Source analysis was also run on a subset of
subjects to better refine the spatial resolution of the observed local effects.
GMFP increased, compared to baseline, both during and after active tDCS.
LMFP increased after the end of stimulation in parietal and frontal clusters bilaterally, while no difference was found in the temporal clusters. The
results suggest that anodal tDCS induces a widespread rise of cortical excitability, both during and after the end of the stimulation

G105
EEG TIME-FREQUENCY DYNAMIC FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
WITH MEDIAL-FRONTAL REGIONS: INDEXING EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND MOTOR CONTROL DURING A GO/NO-GO TASK Anne
V. Tootell1, Adreanna T. Massey1, Matthew D. Bachman1, Jessica S. Ellis1, Selin

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

225

Poster Session G
Aviyente2, Edward M. Bernat1; 1University of Maryland College Park, Clinical and
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2Michigan State University, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering — There is growing interest in measures indexing dynamic functional connectivity underlying cognitive and behavioral
processes. In the context of a go/no-go task, the present study assesses
dynamic functional connectivity with medial-frontal regions during the N2
component using time-frequency phase-locking value (PLV) measures in
the theta band (Aviyente et al., 2011; Mutlu et al., 2012). Connectivity with
motor areas was assessed during response execution and inhibition, and
dorsolateral prefrontal regions were assessed relative to inhibition and a
working memory manipulation. A normative sample (N=76) participated
in two go/no-go tasks: a simple version in which separate letters indicated
go vs. no-go, and a 1-back working memory version in which repeated
letters were no-go and non-repeated were go. As predicted, significant
increases in functional connectivity were observed between lateral and
medial prefrontal (PFC) areas for no-go relative to go trials, consistent with
engagement of dlPFC during inhibition. Importantly, significant increases
in medial-lateral PFC functional connectivity was observed in the working
memory go/no-go task relative to the simple go/no-go task (t(75) = 5.98; p
=.001), offering new high time-resolution information supporting the view
that medial-lateral PFC functional integration is a mechanism underlying
working memory. Lastly, functional connectivity during motor execution,
between medial PFC and contralateral versus ipsilateral motor cortices,
demonstrated sensitivity of the PLV measure to motor processes (t(75) =
3.94; p = .001). Results provide validation for the sensitivity of the proposed
time-frequency PLV measures to hypothesized dynamic functional connectivity with medial-frontal areas underlying inhibition, motor control, and
working memory.

G106
CAPTURING AND DRIVING NEURAL OSCILLATIONS WITH A
PHASE-LOCKED-LOOP MODEL-DRIVEN CONTROLLER Kevin
Horecka1, Patrick Watson1, Rama Ratnam1, Neal Cohen1; 1University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign — Emerging research on characteristic in vivo neural
oscillations suggests that precise timing information, including phase-domain information, is critical for coordinating multiple networks to perform
complex information processing (Buzsaki et al. 2004). In addition, neural
network models encoding memory items in patterns of oscillatory interference possess advantages over models that use static weights (Burwick
2006). In this work, we explore the relationship between memory-driven
neural oscillations and oscillations present in pathological epileptiform
activity, to examine if they share common oscillatory structures. We present a phase-locked-loop-based neural model using a complex Hebbian
learning rule to encode oscillatory interference patterns as trajectories in
phase space such that they can be recovered from partial cue inputs (Itzkevitch & Hopenstadt, 2001). We demonstrate that phase trajectories can
encode and reconstruct remembered neural states and provide feedback
control of neural oscillatory activity to drive networks into precise patterns
of oscillatory synchrony. Using electrocorticography data recorded during
epileptiform activity in a canine epilepsy model (Davis et al. 2011), we
explore 1) the features of ictal (i.e., seizure), and interictal phase trajectories,
2) optimal control parameters for maintaining interictal rhythms, and 3)
critical points in oscillating phases that could be used to predict and interrupt seizure activity. We then discuss the implications of using a memory
model to predict seizure activity and the possible relationships between
memory-driven oscillations and pathology.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
G107
NEURAL NETWORK FOR TOOL USE UNVEILED BY FMRI IN
HEALTHY SUBJECTS AND LESION ANALYSIS IN APRAXIC
PATIENTS Elvira Salazar-López1, Marie Luise Brandi1,2, Afra Wohlschläger2,
Benedikt J. Schwaiger2, Georg Goldenberg3, Joachim Hermsdörfer1; 1Technische
Universität München, 2Klinikum rechts der Isar. Technische Universität München,
3
Klinikum Bogenhausen — This project investigates the neural networks
involved in tool use, a daily task frequently impaired in patients suffering from apraxia. It collects evidence from two brain-imaging paradigms:

226

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
event-related fMRI in elderly controls and lesion analysis in patients with
damage of the medial cerebral artery following stroke. Both experiments
use a tool carousel for controlled tool presentation (12 tools from daily
life). FMRI-data is analyzed with SPM8 in a factorial design (object and
task) during the planning- and action-phase. In the lesion study Voxel
Lesion Symptom Mapping is applied to behavioral execution of patients
and lesions detected, analyzing the factors: score parameter, damaged side
(left, right) and tool used; in addition a ROI analysis specifies the findings.
Results yield a left lateralized network that includes the superior and inferior parietal lobe and the intraparietal sulcus, the dorsal and ventral premotor cortex and the middle frontal gyrus, the temporal cortex and the lateral
occipital complex, that is similar in both studies. Despite moderate performance errors in patients with right brain damage these pathways were
not detected, suggesting a more spread distribution of responsible networks and different sources for failures. The correspondence of the areas
revealed by fMRI in healthy subjects and the left-sided areas damaged in
the patient´s group demonstrates the role of dorsal and ventral pathways
in complex actions like tool use, with an especial importance of frontal and
parietal areas. Methodological benefits of employing the tool carousel and
the two different populations strengthen the findings of the project.

G108
SENSORIMOTOR CONTROL OF VOCAL PITCH AND FORMANT
TRAJECTORIES IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE Fatemeh Mollaei1,2, Douglas M. Shiller1,3, Shari R. Baum1,2, Vincent L. Gracco1,2; 1Centre for Research on
Brain, Language and Music, McGill University, 2School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, 3École d’orthophonie et d’audiologie, Université de Montréal — Auditory feedback provides information on multiple
speech output parameters including pitch (fundamental frequency, or F0)
and formant properties. Each of these parameters underlies different linguistic dimensions in English, with F0 encoding primarily prosodic properties and formant frequencies encoding the vocal tract area functions that
underlie phonological units. Inducing auditory errors in one or the other of
these acoustic parameters has been used to examine the manner in which
auditory feedback is integrated with ongoing speech motor processes. The
capability of individuals to adapt to induced sensory errors may be used
to evaluate the control problems associated with speech motor disorders.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one such disorder in which patients exhibit
difficulty in learning new sensory-motor correspondences. An issue that
has not been addressed is whether this impairment applies to all aspects
of speech or whether fundamental frequency and formant parameters of
speech might be differentially affected. Here we employed a sensorimotor compensation paradigm to investigate the mechanisms underlying
the control of vocal pitch and formant parameters using a within subject
design. PD and age-matched control participants produced speech while
their auditory feedback corresponding to F0 and first formant frequency
(F1) was altered unexpectedly and on random trials. PD participants exhibited a larger compensatory response to F0, however they showed a reduced
compensation to F1 perturbations compared to age-matched controls. The
results suggest that the sensory-based control of pitch and formant frequency might be differentially impaired in PD.

G109
AUGMENTED AUDITORY FEEDBACK TO LEARN A NOVEL UPPER
LIMB JOINT COORDINATION REACHING PATTERN Shinya Fujii1,2, Tea
Lulic1,3, Joyce L. Chen1,4; 1Sunnybrook Research Institute, 2Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science, 3McMaster University, 4University of Toronto — Studies

show motor learning is more effective when practice occurs with a reduced
frequency of augmented feedback compared to feedback on every trial. The
aim of this study is to test what frequency of augmented auditory feedback
facilitates the learning of a novel upper limb movement. Fourteen healthy
volunteers learned to perform a novel reaching pattern using their arm
across 4 blocks of 25 trials. Participants either received auditory feedback
on every other practice trial, i.e. 50% feedback (N=7), or on every trial i.e.
100% feedback (N=7). The auditory feedback was a pure-tone sound that
changes in amplitude, proportional to the amount of error in joint coordination relative to the target pattern. After training, participants performed 25
no-feedback trials, and an additional 25 no-feedback trials the next day to
test retention. A two-way ANOVA with factors training block and feedback
condition on the mean error of joint coordination showed a significant main

2015 Annual Meeting
effect of training block (p < 0.05). Auditory feedback guided the joint coordination to be closer to the target pattern over the course of training. There
was no significant difference in the mean error between feedback conditions at post-training and retention. However, Levene’s tests for equality
of variances showed significantly smaller inter-individual variability in the
group that practices with 100% compared to 50% feedback (p < 0.05). The
results suggest augmented auditory feedback can guide the learning of a
novel joint coordination pattern, and auditory feedback on every trial may
result in more consistent learning across individuals.

G111
MODULATION OF INTERHEMISPHERIC INHIBITION AFTER TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION OF PRIMARY MOTOR
CORTEX Michael Vesia1,2, Tea Lulic3, Roberta Pellicciari1,2, Reina Isayama1,2,
Robert Chen1,2, Joyce L Chen3,4; 1Toronto Western Research Institute, 2Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of Toronto, 3Sunnybrook Research Institute, 4Department of Physical Therapy and Graduate Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Toronto — Transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) is a non-invasive approach to modulate cortical excitability and
brain function in humans. It has the potential to facilitate motor learning in
healthy individuals, and enhance motor recovery after stroke. Anodal tDCS
increases, while cathodal tDCS decreases excitability of the motor system.
The aim of this study is to examine neurophysiological mechanisms that
underlie tDCS-induced changes in motor excitability in healthy volunteers
(n=7). We hypothesized that modulation of motor excitability is mediated
in part by changes in interhemispheric inhibition (IHI) from the homologous primary motor cortex (M1) in the opposite hemisphere. We measured
motor excitability with single- and paired-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in both hemispheres before and after anodal, cathodal, or
sham tDCs to left M1 (1.5 mA, 20 min). TMS measures included: motor
evoked potential (MEP) amplitude; intracortical excitability within M1;
and IHI between motor cortices. Anodal tDCS resulted in (1) increased left
M1 excitability (MEP amplitudes), (2) decreased right M1 excitability, and
(3) increased IHI from the left to right hemisphere. In contrast, cathodal
tDCS resulted in (1) no changes in left M1 excitability, (2) increased right
M1 excitability, and (3) decreased IHI from the left to right hemisphere.
Together, these findings suggest that tDCS not only changes the excitability of the stimulated area, but also modulates the contralateral hemisphere
through changes in interhemispheric connections. They also are consistent
with interhemispheric competition models suggesting pathophysiological
changes of excitatory and inhibitory interactions between hemispheres
after stroke, and they may be modulated by tDCS.

G112
INVESTIGATING THE ROLE OF CEREBELLUM IN SENSORY PROCESSING DURING VOCAL BEHAVIOR Zarinah Agnew1, Gill Jeevit1, Srikantan Nagarajan1, Richard Ivry2, John Houde1; 1UCSF Dept of Otolaryngology,
University of California, San Francisco, 2Action & Cognition Lab, University of
California, Berkeley — It has been proposed that the cerebellum serves to

generate predictions about the sensory consequences of future movements.
Complete or over reliance on sensory feedback is thought to result in unstable movements. Patients with cerebellar ataxia are known for their deficits in visually guided movement and it is suggested that this group are
less able to make accurate predictions about the sensory consequences of
movements and have to rely on reafferent information which ultimately
leads to unstable movements. The present study aimed to investigate the
nature of auditory feedback processing in patients with cerebellar degeneration by measuring various aspects of vocal behavior. Patients were tested
on a battery of vocal assessments designed to probe different aspects of
vocalization: we investigated ability to produce spontaneous voicing, pitch
tracking of a moving pitch target and pitch perturbation. We investigated
the hypothesis that reducing auditory feedback during vocalization would
improve vocal stability. In order to investigate this idea further, a third
experiment was carried out where we investigated how patients responded
to perturbations in pitch production whereby auditory feedback is pitch
shifted during vocalization. As predicted, patients with cerebellar damage
displayed significantly altered responses to the pitch shift compared to
healthy age matched controls indicating an alteration in the way reafferent
information is utilized.Together, these three experiments provide compel-

Poster Session G
ling evidence in favor of the idea of the cerebellum as a prediction system,
the dysfunction of which leads to over reliance on sensory feedback and
hence unstable auditorily guided vocal movements.

G113
REVIEW OF GAIT IMPROVEMENT BY SENSORY FEEDBACK IN
PARKINSON’S DISEASE PATIENTS Yoram Baram1; 1Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology — A treatment modality for movement disorders by
visual feedback is reviewed. The natural closed-loop sensory-motor feedback system is imitated and enhanced by a wearable virtual reality apparatus which, employing body-mounted inertial sensors, responds dynamically to patient’s own motion, displaying an earth-stationary image of a
checkerboard-like tiled floor. Clinical and at-home studies performed on
different cohorts at different locations, and published in recent years have
shown significant gait improvement in patients with Parkinson’s disease
using the apparatus. In contrast to open-loop devices, which impose constant-velocity visual cues in a “treadmill” fashion, or rhythmic auditory
cues in a “metronome” fashion, requiring constant vigilance and attention
strategies, and, in some cases, instigating freezing in Parkinson’s patients,
the closed-loop device increased walking speed and stride length, eliminating freezing of gait in most patients, without side effects. Clinical measurements have shown an average improvement of 25.7% (p=0.001) in walking speed and 30.8% (p=0.0085) in stride length achieved by closed-loop
visual feedback, compared to 13.8% (p=0.230) in walking speed and 15.0%
(p=0.056) in stride length, obtained by open loop visual input. Following
two-week at-home training, residual improvement in walking without the
device was 17.1% (p=0.0004) in walking speed and 12.4% (p=0.003) in stride
length. Visual feedback was found to reduce gait initiation time by 6.2%.
Preliminary EEG results show increased information flow from occipital to
parietal and motor lobes in the beta range while walking with visual feedback, and residually, without the device, immediately following device use.

G114
SHARED MECHANISMS FOR SPEECH ERROR CORRECTION AND
SENSORIMOTOR LEARNING Caroline Niziolek1, Srikantan Nagarajan1,
John Houde1; 1University of California, San Francisco — When we speak, we

monitor the sound of our own voice--our auditory feedback--and adjust
our speech to counteract deviations from what we intend to say. Evidence
for this monitoring and adjustment comes primarily from two types of
experimental paradigms: the first, unexpected feedback alteration, probes
rapid error correction by employing sudden changes to auditory feedback
that are sparse and random, such that they cannot be learned. The second,
sensorimotor adaptation, probes speech learning by applying consistent
manipulations to auditory feedback, causing a temporarily remapping of
articulatory commands that persists after feedback is returned to normal.
In two complementary experiments, we used magnetoencephalography
(MEG) and real-time auditory feedback alteration to examine how these
two mechanisms, adaptation and error correction, interact. Results show
that auditory cortical responses to altered feedback were increased relative
to baseline trials in Experiment 1, when they could not be predicted, but not
in Experiment 2, when the feedback alteration was learned. Furthermore,
compensatory “error correction” responses, in which subjects changed
their vocal output within 200 ms to counteract the imposed changes in
feedback, were larger in Experiment 1 than in Experiment 2, despite comparable magnitudes of unexpected change. These results suggest that the
learned remapping of vowel articulatory movements interacts with rapid
error correction; these two processes may therefore be governed by shared
neural mechanisms.

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
G115
ASSESSING THE ROLE OF SPONTANEOUS EEG ALPHA PHASE
IN THE ESTIMATION OF INTERVAL DURATIONS Alex Milton1, Christopher Pleydell-Pearce1; 1University of Bristol, School of Experimental Psychology — Although the phase of ongoing EEG alpha band activity (7-13Hz)
has been shown to modulate the detection of sensory input, it is less clear
if it also influences its temporal encoding. While some suggest that phase
changes in low-frequency rhythms might correspond to the demarcation

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

227

Poster Session G

2015 Annual Meeting

of discrete temporal intervals of perception, efforts to establish this link
have so far provided only indirect evidence. This study draws upon developments in the time perception literature to address this question. Here,
evidence suggests that temporal encoding is inherent in the time-course
of neural activity involved in stimulus processing, and need not require a
separable mechanism. This implies that alpha phase could modulate estimations of time via its influence on the excitability of neural populations
engaged in sensory processing. Accordingly, we assessed whether variations in the estimation of millisecond intervals were related to variations in
the phase of alpha. 14 participants performed a two-interval discrimination
task where they indicated the relative duration (Longer/Shorter) of a comparison versus a standard interval. The phase of alpha activity preceding
duration onset was retrospectively calculated and its effect on the subsequent time estimation was investigated using a cluster-based permutation
analysis. The results revealed that differing estimations of relative interval
length were associated with differing phase distributions at left posterior
electrodes in the period immediately preceding and including onset of the
first interval. Analysis also demonstrated that negative phases at stimulus onset predicted Longer responses, and the findings support a possible
mechanism by which phase relates to temporal encoding.

administration of the pleasant odour were rated significantly more pleasant
than the same faces presented after administration of the unpleasant odour,
statistically. Analysis of ERPs in response to faces revealed three clusters
of electrodes which showed statistically significant effects of odours on
scalp potentials in six time points during the late ERP latency period (600950 ms). Topographic maps indicated increased negativity in occipital and
posterior temporal-parietal electrodes in response to faces in the pleasant
odour condition. The findings further support existing research showing
that positively- and negatively-valenced odours can shift hedonic evaluations of faces such that they are more or less favourable, respectively. Moreover, results suggest that late ERP components (>600 ms) may be responsible for disentangling the effects of odours on hedonic evaluations of faces.

G116
SPEAKING TOGETHER: AN INVESTIGATION OF JOINT, SYNCHRONIZED SPEECH PRODUCTION. Kyle M. Jasmin1,2, Carolyn McGettigan3,

between a voluntary action and its sensory effect (Haggard et al., 2002) – is
considered as a valid implicit measure of sense of agency (SoA), i.e., the
capacity of controlling one’s own actions. IB has been thoroughly studied
from a behavioral point of view; however, its neural underpinnings remain
to discover. Although providing evidence that supplementary motor complex is involved, the available research findings are still too scarce to draw
definitive conclusions. In addition, always the same two well-validated
paradigms were used to collect data on IB. Here, for the first time, transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), together with a new paradigm
(Cavazzana et al., 2014), was used to investigate a possible causal relationship between the pre-SMA, in virtue of its involvement in the planning of
action, and IB. Fifteen participants (mean age in years: 22.93±1.98; 4 males)
underwent testing after submitting to anodal, cathodal, and sham-control
stimulations during three separate sessions (Experiment I). Subsequently
the same stimulation protocol was administered by involving the right
primary auditory cortex (PAC) as a control region, given its role in processing the sensory auditory effects of voluntary action (Experiment II).
Results showed a significant reduction of IB only after perturbing pre-SMA
(p<.05). No involvement of the PAC was found. Overcoming a correlational
approach, the present study supports a causal involvement of pre-SMA in
our experience as agents of our own actions, thus suggesting an essential
contribution of this prefrontal region to SoA.

Zarinah K. Agnew4, Nadine Lavan3, Oliver Josephs1, Fred Cummins5, Sophie K.
Scott1; 1University College London, 2National Institute of Mental Health, 3Royal
Holloway University of London, 4University of California San Francisco, 5University
College Dublin — Synchronized behavior —chanting, singing, praying, danc-

ing—is found in all human cultures, and is central to religious, military and
political activities that require people to get along and work together; however, we have yet to determine the neural profiles of synchronous behavior
or understand how these activities improve group cohesion. We scanned
participants with functional magnetic resonance imaging while they spoke
and listened to sentences alone, and also when they spoke simultaneously
with an experimenter. On trials when subjects spoke with the experimenter,
we manipulated whether the subject heard the experimenter speak the
same sentence (allowing synchrony) or different sentences (preventing synchrony), and also whether the voice they heard was live or pre-recorded.
Subjects were unaware that recordings were used during the experiment,
and their ability to distinguish live and recorded trials was confirmed
behaviorally. We found that, compared to basic speech perception and production baselines, synchronous speaking activated bilateral auditory fields
in superior temporal gyrus, extending into anterior and posterior STG, ventral right parietal fields and right Broca’s area. We also found that when
subjects spoke synchronously with a live (but not recorded) partner who
could perform the task jointly and cooperatively, a well-established neural
correlate of speech production—suppression of auditory regions—did not
occur; instead, auditory cortex responded as though the subject were listening but not speaking. These results suggest that synchrony’s social benefits
may relate to an altered ability to distinguish who is speaking—a blurring
of self and other that occurs outside conscious awareness.

G117
EFFECTS OF PLEASANT AND UNPLEASANT ODOURS ON EVALUATIONS OF NEUTRAL MALE AND FEMALE FACES: AN EEG STUDY
Stephanie Cook1, Nicholas Fallon1, Hazel Wright1, Anna Thomas2, Timo Giesbrecht2, Matt Field1, Andrej Stancak1; 1University of Liverpool, 2Unilever Research
and Development — Odours influence affective behaviour and exert crossmodal effects on other stimuli, often modulating our preferences for objects
in other modalities. Behavioural research has demonstrated changes in
evaluations of faces presented in the presence of pleasant or unpleasant
odours. Evaluative context of the event-related potential (ERP) response
to faces is known to be reflected during the late positive potential (LPP).
The present study aimed to observe the effects of pleasant and unpleasant odours on evaluations of a large set of neutral male and female faces
by both males and females, using ERP analysis. Participants (N=20) rated
neutral faces following administration of pleasant (jasmine) and unpleasant (methylmercaptan) odours, plus a no-odour control. EEG was recorded
continuously using a 129-channel system. Neutral faces presented after

228

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

G118
NEURAL UNDERPINNINGS OF THE PERCEIVED LINKAGE
BETWEEN VOLUNTARY ACTIONS AND SENSORY EFFECTS: A
TRANSCRANIAL DIRECT CURRENT STIMULATION STUDY. Annachiara Cavazzana1, Barbara Penolazzi1, Chiara Begliomini1, Patrizia Silvia Bisiacchi1;
1
University of Padua (Italy) — Intentional Binding (IB) - the temporal attraction

G119
DOES INDUCING DISBELIEF IN FREE WILL ALTER BRAIN CORRELATES OF PRECONSCIOUS MOTOR PREPARATION?: A REPLICATION STUDY Fenner Macrae1, Michael Pitts1; 1Reed College, Portland,
Oregon — The current study is a direct replication of a recent experiment

(Rigoni et al., 2011, Psychological Science) which found that inducing disbelief in free will was associated with an amplitude reduction of the readiness potential (RP) ERP component more than 1 second prior to a voluntary
response. This finding was surprising because an abstract belief appeared
to have affected preconscious neural activity prior to the execution of voluntary actions. With assistance from the original authors, all procedural
and EEG/ERP methods were reproduced as closely as possible. Participants in the “anti-free-will” group read an essay which argued against the
existence of free will while control participants read a matched essay that
did not mention free will. Both groups were then tested using the classic
Libet paradigm (Libet, 1983) and RPs were measured and quantified. The
effectiveness of the belief manipulation was assayed using the FWD scale.
Contrary to Rigoni et al. (2011), we found no differences in RP amplitude
between the anti-free-will and control groups. However, we also found no
differences in the FWD scores between groups, suggesting that the belief
manipulation may have been ineffective. To test whether RP amplitude is
at all sensitive to beliefs in free will we examined whether there were any
correlations between FWD scores and RP amplitudes (N=28). We found no
significant correlations suggesting again that RP amplitude is unaffected by
free will beliefs. The current study suggests that more evidence is required
before the original findings are accepted as reliable and reproducible effects.

2015 Annual Meeting

G120
PARACINGULATE SULCUS MORPHOLOGY PREDICTS HALLUCINATIONS IN SCHIZOPHRENIA Jane Garrison1, Charles Fernyhough2, Mark
Haggard1, Simon McCarthy-Jones3, Jon Simons1; 1University of Cambridge, UK,
University of Durham, UK, 3Macquarie University, NSW, Australia — Hallucina-

2

tions are often regarded as a cardinal feature of schizophrenia but around
30% of patients never experience such symptoms, and research has yet to
identify the brain mechanisms that distinguish patients who experience
hallucinations from those who do not. In this study, we demonstrate that
morphological variation in a specific medial prefrontal brain structure, the
paracingulate sulcus (PCS), predicts the occurrence of hallucinations in
patients with schizophrenia. Structural MRI scans from 113 patients and 40
healthy controls were examined, and the length of the PCS measured across
both hemispheres using a newly validated technique, carried out blind to
diagnosis. PCS length in patients with hallucinations was significantly
reduced compared to patients without hallucinations and healthy controls.
There was no difference in sulcal length between patients who experienced
auditory hallucinations and those who experienced them in other sensory
modalities, supporting a domain-general reality-monitoring account of hallucinations. A logistic regression analysis established the reliability of the
observed results in the context of a range of potentially confounding demographic and symptom variables, revealing that left hemisphere PCS length
was the only significant predictor of hallucinations in schizophrenia, with
a 1cm reduction in sulcal length increasing the likelihood of a patient experiencing hallucinatory symptoms by 19.9%. These results provide a direct
link between hallucinations in schizophrenia and morphological variation
in a specific structural feature of the brain.

G121
HAPTIC HALLUCINATIONS: EVIDENCE FROM EVENT-RELATED
POTENTIALS Will Rizer1, Daniel Wilbern1, Sonja Prychitko1, Andrea Savord1,
Mounia Ziat1; 1Northern Michigan University — Haptic hallucinations, com-

monly known as formication, consist of the feeling of insects crawling on
or beneath the skin. To further understand this phenomenon, we examined
event-related potentials (ERPs) during trials in which participants wore a
sleeve that delivers sensations similar to bugs crawling on the skin. The
main goal was to identify which moving stimulus speed is closest to that
of a crawling insect. We tested three different speeds (low, medium, high)
travelling distally (elbow to wrist) or proximally (wrist to elbow) along the
left forearm. Results show that for early somatosensory ERPs, N80 was
observed over contralateral parietal electrode sites (P4), with amplitudes
larger for higher speeds in both proximal and distal conditions. The same
trend has been observed for the later somatosensory component N140,
over midline (Fz, Pz), ipsilateral frontal (F3), and bilateral parietal (P3/4)
electrode sites. For the positive component P1, larger amplitude has been
observed for lower speeds over midline (Fz, Pz), frontal (F3/4, F5/6), frontal-central (FC5/6), and parietal (P3/4) bilateral electrode sites. P2 was
only observed over the midline (Fz, Pz) and ipsilateral frontal (F3) electrode sites. Based on participants’ survey answers, the slowest speed felt
more like an insect crawling on the skin, which suggests that insect-like
stimulus generates higher amplitudes for positive components and lower
amplitudes for negative components.

G122
A FIRST LOOK USING FMRI AT HOW THE BRAINS’ OF CHILDREN
WITH AND AUTISM ACTIVELY TIME SUPRA-SECOND DURATIONS
Jonathan T Huck1, Warren H Meck2, Martha B Denckla3, Melissa J Allman1; 1Michigan State University, 2Duke University, 3Kennedy Krieger Institute/Johns Hopkins
Medicine — Specific goals: Pathophysiological differences in the primordial

interval timing system (in the milliseconds to minutes range) are beginning
to be revealed in autism and related psychological disorders. The timing
of supra-second durations is well known to recruit cortico-striatal timing
mechanisms in adults. To-date, there are no fMRI studies of interval timing
in typical childhood, or in those affected with autism. Methods: Children
with and without autism completed a time perception task inside the
magnet. On each trial, a standard (S) and comparison (C) stimulus duration were presented in quick succession, and children were asked to judge
whether C was ‘shorter’ or ‘longer’ than S. S was either (consistently) 2.2-s
or 8.2-s. In both versions, the six C durations were deviants of S (+/-12, 24,

Poster Session G
36%). Our a-priori ROI mask included regions typically recruited during
adult time perception tasks (e.g., supplementary motor cortex, striatum,
cerebellum). Results: Of particular note, we observed an apparent over-engagement of striatal timing mechanisms when children with autism were
timing relatively shorter S and C durations—for instance unlike unaffected
children, they revealed striatal activity during the 2.2-s but not 8.2-s standard duration; and tended to recruit the striatum across the comparison
durations in the 2.2-s version of the task (ranging between 1-3-s). Conclusion: Children with and without autism show different patterns of activity
in several brain regions typically involved in temporal processing, notably
the striatum. This pattern may suggest autistics experience a subjective
lengthening of relatively short durations, and/or, a proclivity to engage
beat-based timing mechanisms.

G123
ACTION PREDICTION WITHOUT MOTOR EXPERIENCE IN
8-MONTH-OLD INFANTS: EVIDENCE FROM LOOKING TIME AND
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES Carina de Klerk1, Victoria Southgate1, Gergely Csibra1,2; 1Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Birkbeck
College, University of London, 2Cognitive Development Centre, Central European
University — A popular idea in cognitive neuroscience is that in order to
predict others’ actions observers need to map those actions onto their own
motor repertoire. If this is true, infants should be unable to predict actions
for which they have no previous motor experience. However, recently it
has been suggested that observational experience might facilitate prediction and shape the sensorimotor regions of the brain in a similar manner as
physical experience does (Cross et al., 2009). We investigated this idea using
a looking time paradigm in which pre-walking infants were presented with
videos of visually familiar, upright and visually unfamiliar, inverted walking actions which were briefly occluded from view followed by either a
correct (time-coherent) or an incorrect (time-incoherent) continuation of
the action. Infants looked significantly longer at the incorrect compared
to the correct continuations of the upright, but not the inverted walking
actions. In a follow-up study we investigated sensorimotor cortex activation, as measured by electroencephalography, as a neural indication of
action prediction in another group of pre-walking infants. Infants showed
significantly more sensorimotor cortex activation during the occlusion of
the upright walking actions that we know they can predict, than during the
occlusion of the inverted walking actions that they cannot predict. Taken
together, these findings are inconsistent with the idea that motor experience is crucial for action prediction and instead they suggest that infants
may be able to use their extensive experience with observing other peoples’
actions to generate action predictions.

G124
BEHAVIORAL AND NEURAL CORRELATES OF CO-SPEECH GESTURE UNDERSTANDING ARE MODULATED BY THE SEMIOTIC
CONCEPT OF PEIRCE’S UNIVERSAL CATEGORIES OF PERCEPTION. Dhana Wolf1,2, Linn-Marlen Rekittke1, Irene Mittelberg1, Klaus Mathiak1;
1

RWTH Aachen University, Germany, 2JARA Translational Brain Medicine,
Aachen/Jülich, Germany — Co-speech gestures are intrinsically ambiguous

and become meaningful only within a given speech context. Their low codification proved challenging for comprehensive classification approaches
for empiric analysis (review: Andric et al., 2012) We utilized the concept of
the Universal Categories of Perception (UC; Charles Sanders Peirce, 1960),
as a semiotic foundation to characterize co-speech gestures with a focus
on the interpreting mind. Their neuro-cognitive representation was investigated with behavioral and neuroimaging experiments. Eighteen healthy
German subjects watched video recordings of freely narrated stories during
a behavioral experiment (button press responses) and a subsequent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measurement. Subject’s gesture
perception was modulated with three tasks corresponding to the three UCs
in a top-down manner: UC1 (potentiality of meaning) is predominant in the
hand movements itself; UC2 (contextualized meaning) in the disambiguation of a gesture by the accompanying speech; and UC3 (patterns) in gestures with learned meaning (e.g. thumbs up). Task-induced modulation of
gesture interpretation was confirmed by significant differences in response
patterns and increased within-task correlations. Intersubject-correlation
analysis of fMRI data confirmed corresponding modulation of neural

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

229

Poster Session G
recruitment patterns for the three tasks. These involved orbitofrontal cortex
(task 1), precuneus (Task 2) and right lateral occipital, superior temporal,
and left inferior frontal gyri (task 3). Our findings support the notion that
well-established semiotic principles such as the UCs are suitable to investigate multimodal perception processes in the context of social cognition.

THINKING: Decision making
G125
STRATEGIC CONTROL OF GENERALIZATION DURING CATEGORIZATION Carol Seger1, Kurt Braunlich1; 1Colorado State University — To
investigate decision making during a task requiring strategic control of
generalization, we collected fMRI data while participants performed a prototype-distortion categorization task using two different rules. To categorize according to the “Lax” rule, participants had to allow all similar exemplars into the category, while excluding unrelated (random) exemplars. To
categorize according to the “Strict” rule, participants had to allow only the
prototype into the category, while excluding random exemplars. Both tasks
were associated with a largely overlapping set of frontoparietal regions.
Using model-based analyses, we investigated effects associated with categorical uncertainty and stimulus entropy. Across both rules, we observed
effects associated with increasing distance from the bound in somatomotor
(left precuneus), frontoparietal (right inferior parietal lobe), and default
mode (right angular gyrus, posterior cingulate) networks. Conversely
we observed an effect of decreasing distance from the decision bound in
regions associated with the dorsal attention (bilateral inferior opercularum
and bilateral intraparietal sulcus) and salience (bilateral anterior insula and
medial frontal cortex) networks. While activity within visual regions was
sensitive to increasing stimulus entropy, only the right inferior operularum
(dorsal attention network) showed greater activity in response to stimuli
with lower stimulus-entropy. Categorical analyses between the two rules
provided evidence that regions in the left superior and inferior parietal
lobes were sensitive to the increased generalization demands of the Lax
condition.

G126
HIGHER LANDING ACCURACY IN EXPERT PILOTS IS ASSOCIATED
WITH LOWER ACTIVITY IN THE CAUDATE NUCLEUS Maheen Adamson1,2, Joy Taylor1,2, Daniel Heraldez2, Allen Khorasani2, Art Noda2, Beatriz Hernandez2, Jerome Yesavage1,2; 1Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Health Care, 2Stanford
School of Medicine — The most common lethal accidents in General Aviation

are caused by improperly executed landing approaches in which a pilot
descends below the minimum safe altitude without proper visual references. We examined relevant neural processes in pilots performing a simulated landing approach inside a functional MRI scanner. Pilots (20 – 66 yrs)
were asked to “fly” a series of simulated “cockpit view” instrument landing
scenarios in an MRI scanner. The scenarios were either high risk (heavy fog)
or low risk (medium fog). Pilots with two levels of expertise participated:
Moderate Expertise (Instrument Flight Rules pilots, n = 8) or High Expertise (Certified Instrument Flight Instructors, n = 12). High Expertise pilots
were more accurate than Moderate Expertise pilots in making a “land”
versus “do not land” decision (p < .01). Brain activity in bilateral caudate
nucleus was examined for main effects of expertise during a “land” versus
“do not land” decision with the no-decision control condition modeled as
baseline. In making landing decisions, High Expertise pilots showed lower
activation in the bilateral caudate nucleus compared to Moderate Expertise
pilots (p < .05). During the approach the pilot is engaged in detailed examination of flight instruments while monitoring certain visual references for
making landing decisions. The caudate nucleus regulates saccade eye control of gaze and its role in expertise demonstrated in this study provides
evidence for increased “neural efficiency” in High Expertise pilots relative
to Moderate Expertise pilots.

G127
ACCOUNTING FOR TASTE: TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF DECISION-MAKING FOR ONESELF VERSUS OTHERS Alison Harris1, Cendri
Hutcherson2, Antonio Rangel2; 1Claremont McKenna College, 2California Institute of Technology — Although decision-making research usually focuses on

choosing for oneself, we are often faced with selecting options for others: for

230

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting
example, when preparing a meal for a child or buying lunch for a friend. In
these cases, we must take into account another’s preferences, even though
they may differ markedly from our own. Yet, it is unclear when such attributions of others’ preferences emerge in the time course of choice. Here we
measured participants’ brain activity with event-related potentials (ERP)
while they made food choices for themselves and two partners, one with
similar tastes and one with markedly different (i.e., “health-conscious”)
preferences. As seen previously, neural value signals were visible from 500
to 650 ms after stimulus onset, and were localized to ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), a brain region implicated in valuation. However, neural
activity differentiating decisions for oneself versus others emerged even
earlier, from approximately 300-500 ms post-stimulus, localized to social
cognition regions including posterior superior temporal cortex (pSTC).
These results suggest that representation of the recipient precedes the onset
of value computations, potentially influencing the relative value assigned
to attributes like taste and health. Consistent with this idea, value-related
brain activity showed a significant interaction of the weighting of taste
and health information by the intended recipient. Whereas taste contributed most strongly to ERPs for oneself, health information was weighted
increasingly with increasing partner distance (Self < Similar < Different).
Together, these results provide novel insights into the time course of decision-making when others’ preferences are taken into account.

G128
THINKING FAST, THINKING SLOW, THINKING ALPHA? Olave Krigolson1, Cameron Hassall1; 1Neuroeconomics Laboratory, University of Victoria
— Throughout our daily lives we make a myriad of decisions –ranging

from what to eat to whom to date. Scientific evidence suggests that human
decisions are the product of two distinct systems within the human brain
(Kahneman, 2011). The first, or “fast” system, relies on well known or reflexive answers – for example answering “two plus two is…”. The second, or
“slow” system, supplies more deliberative answers such as the response to
“the square root of three hundred and twelve is…”. Here we used electroencephalography (EEG) in an attempt to find a neural marker that identified
whether or not a participant was making a System I or System II decision
during performance of a perceptual learning task. Over the course of an
hour, participants learned to classify “blobs” – pseudo-randomly generated
shapes into four distinct families. At the mid-point of the experiment, when
participants could accurately classify blobs, we removed two of the familiar
blob families and introduced two new families. Thus at the mid-point of
the experiment participants faced decisions we hoped would either engage
System I - identifying familiar blobs, or System II – identifying the recently
introduced novel blobs. Interestingly, we observed increased alpha activity
over parietal electrode sites when participants classified familiar relative to
unfamiliar blobs – a result that we believe suggests participants were using
System I decision processes when classifying familiar relative to unfamiliar
blobs. Importantly, our results provide a novel methodology and marker
for examining System I and System II in humans.

G129
OCCIPITAL ALPHA-SUPPRESSION DURING REWARD-ANTICIPATION AND FRONTAL-MIDLINE THETA DURING REWARD-OUTCOME CORRELATE WITH DELAY-DISCOUNTING Narun Pornpattananangkul1, Robin Nusslock1; 1Northwestern University — In a delay-discounting
situation, one has to choose between 1) smaller-but-immediate reward
and 2) larger-but-more-delayed reward. Higher preference toward the
smaller-but-immediate option corresponds to more delay-discounting,
while the opposite corresponds to less delay-discounting. People vary in
delay-discounting, and it is unclear how such individual-differences are
related to reward-processing. From the “impulsivity” viewpoint, one’s
impulse to obtain reward hijacks one’s self-control to wait for a larger
amount. Accordingly, more delay-discounting individuals should be more
sensitive to reward-information. On the contrary, from the “delayed-gratification” viewpoint, willing to wait for a larger amount is seen as individuals being susceptible to a larger reward, so much that they decide to
forgo their immediate-but-smaller option. Hence, less delay-discounting
individuals should be more sensitive to reward-information. Here we
tested these two competing hypotheses. Thirty-seven undergraduates completed a delay-discounting task, from which their hyperbolic delay-discounting index, k, was computed. To investigate neural-activity during

2015 Annual Meeting
reward-anticipation and reward-outcome, the EEG time-estimation task
was employed. Participants were instructed to estimate a duration and
were later provided with feedback on their performance. They received
monetary-reward for accurate-performance on Reward trials, but not on
No-Reward trials. Compared to No-Reward trials, Reward trials elicited
stronger Occipital Alpha-Suppression prior to the feedback and stronger
Frontal-Midline-Theta (FMT) after the feedback. More importantly, these
increases in Alpha-Suppression (r = .40, p = .01) and FMT (r = -.32, p = .05)
were more pronounced among less delay-discounting individuals. Because
less delay-discounting corresponds to enhanced reward-processing during
both reward-anticipation and reward-outcome, our results support the
“delayed-gratification” viewpoint.

G130
REWARD POSITIVITIES REFLECT PREDICTION ERRORS IN A
FOUR-ARMED BANDIT TASK Cameron Hassall1, Amy Silver2, Olave Krigolson1; 1Neuroeconomics Laboratory, University of Victoria, 2Neuroscience,
Carleton University — Previous studies on feedback processing in humans

contrast the brain’s response to rewards with the brain’s response to punishments. In electroencephalographic (EEG) experiments, this difference
is typically shown as a negative deflection in the human event-related
brain potential (ERP) called the feedback related negativity (FRN). Recent
evidence suggests, however, that the observed ERP difference between
rewards and punishments is better explained as a positive deflection that is
absent in response to punishments. Termed the reward positivity (RP), this
positive deflection is thought to reflect a positive reward prediction error
signifying that an outcome is better than expected, although this idea has
yet to be fully investigated. To affirm if, like the FRN, the reward positivity
reflects a reinforcement learning prediction error, we had participants play
a four-armed bandit game that only featured rewards. We then compared
our participants’ ERP results (reward positivities) and behavioral results
(bandit choices) to the output of a computational reinforcement learning
(RL) model. The pattern of results for our RL model’s choices mirrored our
participants’ choices, and the magnitude of the prediction errors generated
by the model predicted the amplitude of our participants’ reward positivities. Importantly, these results suggest that the reward positivity indexes a
positive RL prediction error that is absent following punishment.

Poster Session G
tation). Based on earlier work examining the neural correlates of charitable
behavior (e.g., Harbaugh, Mayr, & Burghart, 2007) we explored whether
well-documented life-span increases in giving can be attributed to either
pure or impure altruism. Participants (N=80, age 18–67, M = 44.2) performed a charitable giving task while undergoing fMRI, where giving was
either private or—to elicit impure motives—observed by others. In separate
runs, participants also passively witnessed transactions involving money
to either themselves or charities. We found an increase in giving with age
(r=.40, p <.001) and when observed (17% increase, p < .001). However there
was no trace of an interaction between these two variables—a finding that
is inconsistent with an increased impure motive across the life span. In line
with our previous result regarding neural correlates of pure altruism, activity in reward- and decision-related regions, including anterior cingulate,
ventral striatum (vSTR), ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), and posterior cingulate during mandatory transfers predicted subsequent voluntary giving. Furthermore, giving-related brain activity correlated with age
in overlapping regions of vmPFC and vSTR. These results suggest that, (a)
consistent with the pure altruism motive, neural valuation responses can
reflect the utility of others, and (b) life-span changes in charitable giving are
due to the strengthening of this pure altruistic motive.

G131
INFORMATION SEEKING IN CONSUMER BEHAVIOR: AN ANALYSIS OF PURCHASE HISTORY DATA Ikuya Nomura1, Kazuyuki Samejima2, Ichiro Moda3, Naoki Kato3, Kazuhiro Ueda1; 1The University of Tokyo,
Tamagawa University, 3Asahi Breweries, LTD. — Choice between known goods

2

and unknown goods is repeated in everyday life as new products go on
the market one after another. Such choice is thus one of the key factors of
consumer behavior. We experimentally examined, using 4-armed bandit
task, the underlying neural mechanism of choice between novel and known
goods. We found that participants who tended to seek for information
had a stronger tendency to choose unknown goods and their right frontal
pole was activated when choosing unknown goods. However the previous experiment was conducted in a laboratory setting: participants were
not asked to purchase goods. So we conducted a similar experiment using
4-armed bandit task for persons whose history of buying beers from June
2013 to May 2014 were recorded. We elicited each person’s tendency for
information seeking from the result of bandit task. Moreover we identified,
using entropy, the diversity of goods purchased throughout the period
and, using JS divergence, the change of goods purchased between the first
and the second halves. This revealed correlations between tendency for
information seeking and diversity of goods as well as change of goods. This
result indicates that choosing unknown goods means gaining new information even in the real world.

G132
LOOKING FOR THE HEART IN THE BRAIN: NEUROIMAGING ANALYSES OF LIFE-SPAN DIFFERENCES IN CHARITABLE GIVING Jason
Hubbard1, William T. Harbaugh1, Ulrich Mayr1; 1University of Oregon — Economists distinguish “pure altruism” (i.e., a giver is motived by an increase in
the utility of the recipient) from “impure altruism” (i.e., a giver is motivated
by an increase in utility to him/herself, such as through an increase in repu-

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

231

Poster Topic Index
ATTENTION: Auditory

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Development & aging

A1 – A6, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
E1 – E6, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

C32 – C39, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
F36 – F43, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

ATTENTION: Development & aging

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Goal maintenance &
switching

B1 – B10, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Multisensory
B11 – B14, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C1 – C6, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm

ATTENTION: Nonspatial
D1 – D8, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Other
D9 – D14, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F1 – F14, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
G1 – G7, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

ATTENTION: Spatial
A7 – A13, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
C7 – C14, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
E7 – E13, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
G8 – G13, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B34 – B43, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D35 – D43, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Monitoring & inhibitory
control
A34 – A41, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
C40 – C49, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
E36 – E43, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
G35 – G45, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Other
B44 – B50, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E44 – E53, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

EXECUTIVE PROCESSES: Working memory

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Development & aging

A42– A51, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D44 – D52, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F44 – F54, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
G46 – G55, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

A14 – A20, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Development & aging

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotion-cognition interactions

A52 – A58, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D53 – D59, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G56 – G65, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

A31, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
B15 – B21, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C15 – C21, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D15 – D23, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E14 – E24, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F15 – F32, F34, F35, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
G14 – G25, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Emotional responding
D24 – D34, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G26 – G34, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Other
B22 – B33, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Person perception
A21 – A26, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
C22 – C31, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
E25 – E35, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

EMOTION & SOCIAL: Self perception
A27 – A30, A32, A33, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
F33, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
232

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

LANGUAGE: Lexicon
B51 – B57, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C50 – C56, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D60 – D65, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
F55 – F61, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Other
A59 – A65, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
B58 – B64, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C57 – C63, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D66 – D73, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E54 – E60, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F62 – F68, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

LANGUAGE: Semantic
A66 – A72, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
B65 – B71, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C64 – C72, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
E61 – E68, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F69 – F77, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

2015 Annual Meeting

Poster Topic Index

LANGUAGE: Syntax

G107 – G114, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

E69 – E75, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
G66 – G77, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Multisensory

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Development & aging
B72 – B87, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
D74 – D81, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E76 – E84, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Episodic
A73 – A89, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
B88 – B102, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
C73 – C97, C100, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D82 – D90, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E85 – E96, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
F78 – F91, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm
G78 – G97, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

A107 – A110, A112 – A115, Saturday, March 28,
3:30 - 5:30 pm
C115 – C123, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
F110 – F118, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Other
B108 – B116, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
G115 – G124, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Vision
A116 – A123, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
B117 – B126, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E117 – E124, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

THINKING: Decision making

D91 – D99, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E97 – E101, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

A124 – A132, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
C124 – C132, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
E125 – E133, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm
G125 – G132, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Priming

THINKING: Development & aging

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Other

D101 – D102, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Semantic
A90 – A98, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm

LONG-TERM MEMORY: Skill learning
F92 – F100, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

METHODS: Electrophysiology
G98 – G106, Tuesday, March 31, 8:00 - 10:00 am

B127 – B130, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Other
F119 – F129, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

THINKING: Problem solving
B131 – B132, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am

THINKING: Reasoning
D124 – D133, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am

METHODS: Neuroimaging
D103 – D116, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E102 – E109, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

METHODS: Other
D117, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am

NEUROANATOMY
C98 – C99, C101 – C105, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Audition
A99 – A106, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
C106 – C114, Sunday, March 29, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
F101 – F109, Monday, March 30, 5:30 - 7:30 pm

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Development & aging
B103 – B107, Sunday, March 29, 8:00 - 10:00 am

PERCEPTION & ACTION: Motor control
A111, Saturday, March 28, 3:30 - 5:30 pm
D118 – D123, Monday, March 30, 8:00 - 10:00 am
E110 – E116, Monday, March 30, 1:30 - 3:30 pm

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

233

Author Index
A
Abdul Rahman, A 62, 179
Abellanoza, C 80
Abel, MK 112
Abe, N 40
Abercrombie, HC 94
Abrahamse, E 85
Adair, E 88
Adamson, M 195, 230
Adamson, MM 49, 124
Adams, S 77
Adams, SC 120
Adank, P 197
Addante, RJ 139
Addis, DR 8
Adebayo, M 11, 121
Adeyemo, B 72
Adhimoolam, B 41, 67
Adni, T 184
Adolphs, R 11, 38, 96
Afraz, A 26
Aghamohammadi, A 124
Agnew, Z 147, 227
Agnew, ZK 228
Aguila, E 171
Ahmed, I 149
Ahn, S 205, 213
Ahrens, LM 125
Aisenberg, E 81
Akila, R 216
Alain, C 147
Albanese, BJ 68
Al-Dali, HM 100
Alemán Bañón, J 161
Aleo, F 194
Alexander, P 42
Alfonso, A 196
Alford, W 104
Alfred, KL 186
AlHashimi, O 204
Al-Khalil, K 187
Allan, N 68
Allen, AK 150
Allen, J 180
Allen, PD 149
Allman, MJ 229
Allred, CD 71
Alm, K 52
Alm, KH 51
Alonso, I 107
Alperin, B 62, 63
Altman, M 86
Alyu, F 138
Amitay, S 147
Ammi, M 210
Ammirante, P 198
Amodio, DM 38
Amsel, BD 47
Ananworanich, J 140
Anderson, A 60
Anderson, D 162
Anderson, DE 108
Anderson, M 28, 29, 109
Anderson, MC 51
Anderson, SW 218
Andersson, A 218

234

Andreano, J 11, 66, 121
Andreatta, M 210
Andres, M 173
Andrews, L 149
Andrew, Y 223
Andrzejewski, J 95
Ang, CW 62
Angelides, N 68
Anguera, JA 204
Ankudowich, E 135, 164
Anokhin, A 27
Ansaldo, M 200
Antezana, L 145
Antje, K 87
Archila-Suerte, P 46
Ariza, A 46, 74, 158
Armson, M 137
Arnal, L 113
Arnaud, L 197
Arnold, A 167
Arnold, AE 121
Asano, E 58
Asarnow, R 112
Ascoli, G 168
Ashby, FG 70
Ashby, S 93
Ashford, JW 123, 195
Ashida, H 40
Aslin, R 204
Auguste, K 11, 30, 188
Aurtenetxe, S 158
Austermuehle, A 124
Avenanti, A 66
Aviyente, S 28, 226
Aviyente,, S 27
Awh, E 108
Aydın, TH 138
Ayduk, O 40
Azimi, M 214
Aziz-Zadeh, L 85

B
Babiak, M 189
Babikian, T 112
Baboyan, VG 112
Bachman, M 68, 211, 213
Bachman, MD 213, 225
Bacigalupo, F 173
Baciu, M 64, 190
Bacopulos, A 97
Bader, R 50
Badre, D 11, 28, 29, 43,
69, 70
Bageac, D 11, 195
Baggio, G 145
Bailey, S 130
Baker, C 53, 67
Baker, CI 38, 171
Baker, S 128
Baker, SW 82
Bakhtiar, M 188
Balasubramaniam, R 143
Balasubramanian, V 46
Baldo, J 35
Baldwin, CL 198
Banducci, S 91

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Baniqued, P 62
Banissy, M 153
Bann, S 187
Bansal, S 79
Baram, Y 227
Barbas, H 29
Barbey, AK 132
Barch, D 207
Barczak, A 30
Bardi, L 85, 143
Barense, M 108, 137
Barense, MD 79, 214
Barkley, C 218
Barnett, J 143
Baron, C 124
Barrett, LF 11, 66, 121
Bartlett, M 11, 61
Bartolomeo, P 91
Bass, D 123
Bassett, DS 167
Basten, U 201
Bastidas, S 95
Basurto, J 153
Bate, S 153
Battelli, L 92, 212
Batterink, L 218
Bauer, A 10, 105
Bauer, P 115, 119
Bauer, PJ 53
Bauer, RH 157
Baum, SR 226
Baune, B 179
Bayley, PJ 49
Beadle, J 122
Beagle, A 55
Beagle, AJ 174
Beatty, PJ 212
Beaudry, M 221
Bechara, A 207
Beck, DM 11, 59, 86, 171
Becker, JT 162
Becker, MP 97
Beck, L 217
Bedny, M 97, 201
Bedo, N 36
Begliomini, C 228
Behrmann, M 26
Behroozmand, R 56
Beier, F 220
Beilock, S 43
Bejjani, C 122
Bekkering, H 84
Belfi, A 124
Belham, FS 106
Bellana, B 71
Bellesi, G 180, 181
Bell, M 135
Bellugi, U 36, 101, 217
Benasich, A 45
Benasich, AA 44, 217, 225
Bengson, J 204
Bengson, JJ 205
Bennett, C 10, 164
Bennetto, L 149
Bennetts, R 153
Bennion, K 207
Bentley, V 140

Ben-Zeev, A 94, 95
Bergmann, TO 31
Bergman, S 68
Bergström, F 186
Bergström, ZM 220
Berkes, M 160
Berman, KF 202
Bernat, E 211, 213
Bernat, EM 27, 28, 68, 213,
226
Berners-Lee, A 192
Bernstein, A 53
Bernstein, M 140, 163
Berntsen, D 166
Berron, D 110
Berteau, S 205
Bertini, C 66
Bertone, A 176
Bertossi, E 194
Bessette, K 71
Beswick, M 116
Bettcher, BM 37, 67
Bettoni, R 217
Betz, N 66
Beversdorf, DQ 142
Bezdek, M 209
Bhandari, A 69
Bhangal, S 150
Bhattacharyya, R 104
Biagianti, B 196
Bialystok, E 71, 160, 212
Bidelman, G 133
Bidelman, GM 113
Bidet-Ildei, C 83
Biel, AL 62
Bild-Enkin, H 137
Binder, D 72
Binns, MA 79
Bisiacchi, PS 228
Bismark, A 180
Bitan, T 102
Bjornn, D 166
Black, J 217
Blackwell, A 143
Blaisdell, A 23
Blakemore, S-J 19
Blankenburg, F 185
Blankenship, S 77
Blankenship, SL 164
Blau, S 44, 101
Bledowski, C 11, 185
Block, NR 37
Blommesteyn, J 167
Bloomquist, T 81
Blumberg, E 43
Blumberg, EJ 67
Blumenthal, A 145
Blumstein, S 190
Blundon, E 114
Boas, D 168
Boebinger, D 147
Boehler, CN 157, 177, 211
Boe, S 215
Boesiger, P 99
Boettiger, C 157
Boggess, M 143
Bohnen, N 156

Bo, J 63
Bolognini, N 225
Boly, M 224
Bombeke, K 157, 177
Bond, M 74
Bonfiglio, E 125
Bonnefond, M 31
Bonner, JC 71
Bonner, MF 76
Boothe, ST 194
Bootzin, RR 108
Borders, A 128, 192
Borhani, K 66
Born, J 10, 82
Bornstein, I 199
Borowsky, R 93, 189, 200
Borza, C 92
Bosley, L 224
Bostan, İ 190
Boudelaa, S 100
Boudewyn, M 133
Bowen, D 73
Bowen, HJ 165
Bowles, B 136
Bowman, C 137
Boyce, WT 58
Boyd-Meredith, JT 107
Boyle, C 162
Bozic, M 100
Braem, S 67
Braghittoni, D 194
Braks, N 54
Bramão, I 223, 224
Brandi, ML 226
Brandmeyer, A 55
Brang, D 11, 56, 90
Brass, M 67, 85, 128, 143,
153
Braun, A 102
Braunlich, K 173, 230
Braunwalder, JT 95
Bray, S 110, 167
Breska, A 119
Bressers, C 54
Bressler, S 168
Brewer, A 187
Bridge, DJ 109, 164
Bridger, E 220
Bridger, EK 135
Brigante, R 64
Briggs-Gowan, M 37
Bright, P 69, 154, 224
Brissenden, JA 176, 177
Bristol, R 116
Brixius, W 36
Brookshire, G 10, 165
Broselow, E 74
Brothers, T 103, 131
Brown, J 126
Brown, RJ 115
Brown, TI 136
Brudner, SN 177
Brunye, T 173
Bruss, J 207
Bruzi, A 171
Bryant, N 108
Bryant, V 87

2015 Annual Meeting
Buc Calderon, C 61
Buccigrossi, R 168
Buchanan, B 72
Buchanan, R 39
Buchanan, T 171
Buchanan, TW 99
Buchsbaum, B 128
Buchsbaum, BR 48
Buis, B 45
Bulkes, NZ 219
Bullard, T 71
Buller, A 134
Bullock, D 205
Bullock, T 166
Bulut, T 162
Bundt, C 85, 143
Bunge, S 23, 77, 144
Bunge, SA 78, 144, 145
Bunta, F 46
Burdette, J 214
Burle, B 121, 211
Burles, F 167
Burns, E 10, 152
Burton, P 10, 125
Burzynska, A 83, 91
Burzynska, AZ 98
Butler, A 170
Butler, E 151
Buzzell, GA 41, 98, 198, 212
Byrge, L 11, 38, 96
Byrne, J 45
Byrne, K 174

C
Caballero, C 189
Cabeza, R 49, 76, 166, 192,
194
Caffarra, S 219
Cagan, J 117
Cahana-Amitay, D 215
Calderón, R 173
Calhoun, V 27
Calhoun, VD 27, 28
Callan, D 92
Calma, NE 219
Calvo-Merino, B 56, 172,
215
Cam-CAN, 10, 44, 45, 184
Camchong, J 97
Cameron, D 151
Campbell, D 71
Campbell, K 80, 221
Campbell, KL 10, 45
Campbell, RE 75
Campbell, RJ 63
Can, ÖD 84, 138
Canseco-Gonzalez, E 115,
119, 198
Cantelon, J 173
Cantiani, C 217
Cant, JS 86, 214
Cantlon, J 88
Capilla, A 172, 173, 206,
215
Caplan, JB 193
Carbonnell, L 98, 154
Cardillo, EER 76
Carlson, J 65, 122, 180
Carlson, JM 167
Carmichael, OT 162
Carney, J 114

Author Index
Carota, F 100
Carreiras, M 158, 170, 192,
219
Carrerias, M 189
Carretié, L 173
Carroll, E 69
Carr, VA 136
Carskadon, MA 195
Carter, C 93, 133
Casali, A 224
Casasanto, D 10, 165
Cascio, CN 100
Casini, L 211
Cassidy, BS 194
Castelhano, MS 152
Catlin, S 74
Cavazzana, A 228
Caviness, J 159
Cazzoli, D 166
Ceballos, N 177
Chaddock-Heyman, L 98,
183
Cha, J 81
Chakravarty, M 164
Chandrasekaran, B 126
Chang, E 124
Changoor, A 108
Chan, JS-Y 57, 93
Chan, M 121
Chan, MY 184
Channon, S 180, 181
Chan, W-H 73
Charan, R 223
Chatterjee, A 5, 58, 76, 116,
190
Chechlacz, M 148
Chee, MWL 172
Chen, AJ-W 127
Chen, C-J 205
Cheng, S-k 123, 136, 162
Cheng, S-K 44
Chen, H-C 73
Chen, JL 226, 227
Chen, K-H 85, 218
Chen, N-F 136
Chen, N-k 130
Chen, P 117
Chen, P-HA 10, 154
Chen, P-Y 47, 53
Chen, Q 54
Chen, R 227
Chen, S 55
Chen, SH 66
Chen, Y 162, 170, 193
Chernenok, M 160
Cherubini, P 145
Cheung, S 148
Chevalier, TM 215
Chiang, H-S 79
Chiang, M-C 196
Chiaravalloti, N 123
Chiaravalloti, ND 139
Chiarello, C 132
Ching, C 140, 210
Ching, CRK 65
Chiong, W 174
Chiou, KS 139
Chiu, Y-C 99
Cho, H 150
Choi, Y-J 205, 213
Choong, A 122
Chopra, K 79

Chorghay, Z 11, 139
Cho, S 149, 214
Choudhury, N 217
Chou, Y-h 130
Christianson, K 105
Christ, SE 142
Chua, E 81
Chua, EF 50, 223
Chung-Fat-Yim, A 71
Chung, W 133
Chung, W-L 113
Chung, YS 207
Chun, J 149
Chun, MM 168
Chu, R 102
Chwilla, D 93
Ciaramelli, E 194
Ciccarelli, G 140
Cicchetti, D 156
Cimaroli, S 119
Claire, M 169
Clarke, A 11, 188
Clarke, S 197
Clark, IB 79, 163
Clark, R 183
Clay, S 64
Cobbaert, S 173
Coderre, E 48
Coffel, M 182
Coffey-Corina, S 44
Cogan, GB 113
Cohen, A 74, 158
Cohen, B 69, 208
Cohen, D 11, 152
Cohen, J 71
Cohen Kadosh, R 125, 145
Cohen, MX 214
Cohen, N 80, 192, 226
Cohen, NJ 10, 78, 111, 135
Cohen, R 87, 97
Cohen, RA 140
Cohen, S 223
Cohn, N 46, 191
Colbert, A 63
Cole, M 201
Colich, N 68
Collins, A 156
Collins, AG 70
Collins, PF 84, 97
Comiti, V 56
Conte, MM 11, 148
Conway, CM 156
Cooke, G 80
Cooke, GE 98
Cook, S 228
Cookson, S 70
Cools, R 155
Coon, WG 195
Cooper, C 110
Coppola, G 37
Corina, D 44, 101
Cormack, F 143
Corona Dzul, B 102
Corrigan, F 179
Cort, B 168
Coslett, HB 84
Costa, R 69, 208
Couperus, J 35
Cousins, S 130
Cowan, E 107
Cowie, C 39
Cox, C 142

Cox, JC 81
Craven, AR 147
Creery, J 52
Crew, C 151
Critchley, H 115
Croize, AC 64
Cromheeke, S 182
Crone, N 11, 188
Crookall, R 111
Cross, E 152
Cross, ES 31, 32
Crossley, M 70, 143
Crosson, B 170
Crowell, J 91
Crutchley, P 179
Csibra, G 229
Cuetos, F 189
Cullen, K 10, 125
Cullum, CM 79
Cummings, LR 98
Cummins, F 228
Cunningham, E 224
Cunningham, T 137
Cunningham, W 60
Cunningham, WA 179
Curham, K 180
Curran, T 154
Curtiss, K 48
Cutting, L 37, 130, 217
Cutting, LE 111
Czyzewska, M 220

D
Daffner, K 62, 83
Daffner, KR 63
Dagenbach, D 214
Dagher, A 154
Dahl, R 97
Daianu, M 140, 163
Dalibar, C 99
Damasio, H 85, 218
Dan, A 57
Dang, C 128
D'Angelo, MC 79
Dang, TV 36, 217
Daniel, R 175
Danis, E 183
Danishevsky, B 86
Dan, Y 185
Daou, M 171
Dapretto, M 95
Darrow, J 99
Davachi, L 80, 105, 106,
107, 110, 192
Dave, S 131
Davidenko, N 165
Davidson, D 158, 219
Davidson, PSR 221
Davidson, RJ 94, 124
Davis, B 86
Davis, K 40
Davison, EN 167
Davis, S 76, 194
Davis, T 59, 178
Davranche, K 98
Daws, R 74
Day, DT 56
De Albuquerque, D 119
Deborah, H 167
de Bruijn, ERA 152
DeCarli, C 41

de Chastelaine, M 49, 78
De Coster, L 153
De Houwer, J 67, 128
de Klerk, C 229
DeKraker, J 82
de la Asuncion, J 152
Delaney-Busch, N 39, 122
Delarosa, B 178
DeLaRosa, B 53
Delgado, M 19
Delong, KA 160
DeLong, KA 47
De Loof, E 59
Delorme, A 168
de los Angeles, C 140
de los Angeles, CP 111
DeLuca, J 123
Demanet, J 67, 128, 153
De Meo, R 197
Demeter, E 119
Demir-Ozkay, U 84
Demir Özkay, Ü 138
Demnitz, N 66
Demopoulos, C 148
Denckla, MB 229
Dennis, EL 112
Dennis, NA 137
den Ouden, D-B 101
Deouell, LY 57, 119
Depue, B 212
Desautels, P 78
Desmet, C 153
de Souza, N 97
D'Esposito, M 127
Desrochers, TM 70
Deupree, K 64
Devaney, KJ 176, 177
Devereux, B 103
Devinsky, O 107
Devlin, J 197
de Vries, J 214
Dewhurst, R 224
DeWitt, SJ 184
Dew, ITZ 192
Dhillon, R 11, 188
Diana, R 82
Diana, RA 194
Diaz, M 130
Dickerson, B 11, 66, 121
Dick, F 21, 216
Dickson, DS 200
Diekmann, J 187
DiFrancesco, M 131
DiGeronimo, M 10, 154
Di Gregorio, F 212
DiMenichi, B 150
Ding, G 216
Ding, M 205
Di Pellegrino, G 212
Di Rosa, E 117
Disbrow, EA 69
D'Lauro, C 71
D'Mello, AM 88
Dobbins, IG 81
Dobrota, M-A 120
Dodick, D 159
Doesburg, SM 36
Doidge, AN 51
Dolcos, F 206
Dolcos, S 206
Doll, BB 38
Dollfus, S 91

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

235

Author Index
Donnelly, BE 78
Doss, MK 106
Dougherty, L 77, 164
Douglas, DM 11, 139
Dove, S 157
Dowd, EW 129
Dowker, A 125
Downey, G 151
Downing, P 153
Doxey, C 141, 210
Drake, K 36
Drew, AR 204
Drobes, D 155
Dronkers, N 11, 35, 188
Drucker, JH 165
Drury, J 74, 159, 191
Drury, JE 162, 219
Duarte, A 63, 193
Dubinsky, E 217
Dubois, J 96
DuBrow, S 105, 106
Dudai, Y 109
Dudley, K 145
Duff, MC 53, 68, 122, 221
Dufford, A 157
Duffy, K 79
Duñabeitia, JA 170, 189
Duong-Fernandez, X 130
Duplan, I 172, 206
Dupont, S 107
Durriseau, J 117
Duthoo, W 177
Düzel, E 110
Dwivedi, V 48
Dyke, F 171
Dyson, BJ 62

E
Eades, C 36
Earle, FS 189
Earls, H 154
Eckrich, S 211, 213
Eckstein, MK 145
Edden, R 87
Edden, RAE 97
Eddington, C 160
Egner, T 41, 99, 129
Ehrhardt, N 195
Eichenbaum, H 29
Eichler, E 10, 103
Eisenlohr-Moul, TA 94
Ekman, M 201
Ekstrand, C 93, 189, 200
Ekstrom, A 192
Ekstrom, AD 221
Elias, L 148
Elias, LJ 58
Elke, S 62, 179
Elkins, J 86
Ellenblum, G 74
Elliot, J 166
Ellis, C 191
Ellis, J 213
Ellis, JS 213, 225
Ellis, L 69, 208
Ellis, TL 174
Ell, SW 69
Elward, RL 137
Emmorey, K 72, 132
Engelhardt, L 83
England, B 59

236

2015 Annual Meeting
Erickson, KI 162
Eriksson, J 60, 186
Ernst, B 120, 127
Esmaeili-Firidouni, P 169
Esopenko, C 97
Espensen-Sturges, T 10,
125
Etkin, A 122
Europa, E 220
Evans, CL 177
Evans, D 155
Evans, E 124
Evans, L 153
Evans, LH 51, 109
Evans, S 66, 114, 147, 216
Everling, D 176
Evert, D 182

F
Fabiani, M 11, 171, 184, 192
Fairchild, JK 49, 123, 195
Fajutrao Valles, SF 202
Falcone, B 92
Falcone, G 202
Falk, EB 100
Falkenstein, M 147
Fallon, N 228
Fallon, NB 111
Fandakova, Y 77
Fang, H 163
Fang, S-Y 131
Fan, J 157
Fan, JL 143
Farah, MJ 100
Farnady, C 101
Farris, E 217
Fasel, I 11, 61
Faseyitan, O 84
Faskowitz, J 65, 140
Fassbender, C 66
Faubert, J 176
Faust, M 155
Favila, SE 136
Federmeier, K 191
Federmeier, KD 45, 48, 76,
86, 159, 200
Fedota, JR 98
Fei-Fei, L 59
Feigenson, L 201
Feld, GB 10, 82
Feldker, K 154, 209
Fellows, L 19
Fellows, LK 116
Felton, A 132
Fenesy, M 65
Feng, W 35, 64
Ferber, S 86, 128, 214
Feren, L 40
Ferguson, BJ 142
Ferguson, M 71
Fernández-González, S 206
Fernandez, S 172
Fernyhough, C 229
Ferreira, C 29
Fesharaki, A 182
Feurra, M 222
Fiacconi, C 82
Fias, W 173
Fiati, M 224
Ficarella, S 92, 212
Fidalgo, C 108

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Fidali, BC 11, 148
Fida, M 138, 206
Fiebach, C 172
Fiebach, CJ 11, 185, 201
Field, M 228
Fields, EC 39
Fiez, J 25
Figner, B 173
Filbey, FM 117, 184
Filik, R 101, 102
Filoteo, V 218
Findlay, A 148
Finer, D 219
Fink, G 127
Fink, T 76
Finn, B 179
Finuf, C 141
Fiorentino, R 72
Fisher, M 196
Fisher, SE 202
Fitzmorris, E 162
Fix, S 155
Flegal, K 222
Fleischer, P 196
Fleming, K 169
Flemming, K 169
Fletcher, MA 184
Flindall, J 144
Flindall, JW 172
Flinker, A 55, 113
Flores, V 144, 158
Fodor, B 162
Fogarty, A 94
Fogel, A 73
Fonteneau, E 73
Forbes, C 40
Ford, J 106
Forman, DE 76
Forster, B 56, 172, 205, 215
Fortenbaugh, F 35
Foster, C 78
Foster, CA 71
Fouche, J-P 140
Fox, A 62, 83
Fox, AM 63
Frank, M 97, 156
Fraser, D 123, 214
Fratantoni, J 53
Freedberg, M 85
Fremaux, B 201
Frenck-Mestre, C 104
Freunberger, D 160
Frick, M 197
Friedman, K 116
Friedrich, T 148
Friese, M 99
Frishkoff, GA 156
Frithsen, A 49
Fritsche, A 10, 82
Frost, CP 94
Frost, S 45
Frost, SJ 168
Froud, K 129
Fuchs, J 215
Fugate, R 69
Fujii, S 112, 226
Fujioka, T 198, 200
Funabiki, Y 36
Furst, AJ 49, 123, 195
Fu, S 38, 119

G
Gabrieli, J 32, 130
Gabrieli, JDE 217
Gach, HM 162
Gagnon, E 144
Gagnon, EP 109
Gagnon, SA 165
Galati, G 200
Galeano Weber, E 11, 185
Gale, S 166
Gallagher, N 145
Gallen, CL 127
Galli, G 222
Gallinat, J 199
Gallo, D 10, 165
Gallo, DA 106
Galstyan, A 10, 163
Galvez-Pol, A 56, 215
Gamble, ML 34, 177
Gao, Y 216
Garcea, F 54
Garcea, FE 10, 52
Gardner, T 32
Garnsey, S 105, 161
Garrett, C 148
Garrison, J 229
Garrison, K 85
Gates, K 42, 188
Gauvin, H 20
Gaynor, A 81
Gazzaley, A 42, 204
Gehring, W 59
Gehring, WJ 114
Geib, B 194
Geisler, M 95, 225
Geisler, MW 43, 54, 94
Gelic, A 147
Genheimer, H 210
Genova, H 123
Genova, HM 139
George, GC 56
Georg, K 87
Geschwind, DH 37
Getzmann, S 147
Geurten, M 91
Gevers, W 61
Ghahremani, D 208
Ghane, M 121
Ghazizadeh, A 117
Ghetti, S 77, 78
Ghosh, S 140
Giallonardo, A 56
Gidengil, E 116
Giesbrecht, B 166
Giesbrecht, T 111, 228
Gilam, G 11, 152
Gilbert, J 77
Gilbert, PE 183
Gilboa, A 108
Gillam, R 220
Gillam, RB 129
Gillam, S 220
Gillam, SL 129
Gillebert, C 148
Gilligan, TM 211
Gill, J 55
Gillmeister, H 11, 199
Giovanello, K 42, 78
Gips, B 31
Giza, CC 112

Gjorgieva, E 158
Glahn, DC 179
Glerean, E 94
Glotzbach-Schoon, E 210
Glueck, J 39
Gobbini, MI 87
Godwin, CA 100, 193
Godwin, M 171
Goertz, R 93
Goghari, VM 121
Goh, J 116
Göksun, T 190
Gola, KA 67
Goldenberg, G 226
Goldfarb, EV 168
Goldman, L 208
Gollub, R 168
Gomez, RL 108
Gong, G 216
Gonzalez, C 57, 144
Gonzalez, CLR 172
Goodrich-Hunsaker, N 141
Goodrich, RI 128
Goolsarran, M 70
Gordon, AM 136
Gordon, B 48, 129, 160, 224
Gordon, EM 72
Gordon, R 151
Görgen, K 145
Gorges, M 56
Gorno-Tempini, ML 189
Gosseries, O 224
Gotlib, I 68
Gotts, SJ 11, 195
Goubert, L 153
Gougelet, R 144
Gould, L 93, 189, 200
Gould, M 123
Grabowecky, M 11, 56, 90
Gracco, V 197
Gracco, VL 226
Gradone, A 211
Grady, AL 220
Grafman, J 126
Grafton, ST 167
Graham, R 177, 201
Grainger, J 72, 74, 132
Gramling, L 169
Grand, K 171
Gratton, C 72
Gratton, G 11, 171, 184, 192
Graulty, C 115, 198
Gray, S 10, 165
Gray, T 42
Green, A 145
Green, E 169
Greene, M 56
Greene, MR 11, 59, 98, 126,
132, 133
Greening, SG 209
Green, J 36
Green, SR 88
Greenwood, P 43
Greven, I 153
Grey, S 218
Grice-Jackson, T 115
Grieco, JA 177
Gronau, N 135
Grooms, JK 100, 193
Grose-Fifer, J 125, 208
Gross, J 31
Grossman, M 76, 104

2015 Annual Meeting
Gross, R 123
Grot, S 213
Groves, K 11, 199
Gruber, J 179
Gruber, M 223
Grundy, JG 212
Gu, B 216
Guberman, G 114
Gudmundson, C 39
Guenther, F 170
Guerra-Carrillo, B 144
Guigelaar, E 159
Gullberg, M 218
Gumkowski, N 45, 189
Gunji, A 90
Guo, CC 37
Gupta, J 68
Gureckis, T 104
Guskiewicz, KM 42
Gutchess, AH 194
Gutierrez-Sigut, E 74
Gutman, BA 10, 163
Guyer, A 66

H
Haase, L 169
Hackel, LM 38
Haddad, H 178
Hadden, L 68
Haenschel, C 186
Hagemann, J 38
Haggard, M 229
Hahn, T 11, 185
Halderman, L 179
Halford, JCG 111
Halker Singh, R 159
Halko, MA 176, 177
Hall, S 166
Hallschmid, M 10, 82
Halverson, K 130
Halwani, G 170
Hämäläinen, JA 44
Hamann, S 50, 123
Hambrook, D 34
Hambrook, DA 198
Hamilton, R 75
Hampton Wray, A 62
Hancock, A 220
Hancock, AS 129
Hancock, R 217
Handy, TC 36
Hanelli, A 67
Han, M 130
Han, S 39, 108, 139, 142
Hantke, N 195
Han, Y-J 106
Haque, MK 152
Harbaugh, WT 231
Hare, C 54
Harezlak, J 140
Hari, R 94
Harjunen, V 149
Harms, V 148
Harrell, D 198
Harris, A 87, 230
Harris, AD 97
Harris, DS 186
Harrison, T 62
Harrold, J 111
Hart, J 117
Hart Jr., J 53

Author Index
Hart, Jr., J 79, 178
Hartley, A 64
Hartstra, E 128
hasbroucq, t 154
Hasbroucq, T 98, 211
Haselgrove, C 168
Hassall, C 230, 231
Hassevoort, KM 135
Hasson, U 86
Hathaway, JC 56
Hauck, T 73
Hawco, C 39
Hawes, D 66
Hawkes, T 127
Hawkins, CA 220
Hawks, Z 155
Hayes, SM 76
Hayiou-Thomas, ME 202
Haynes, J-D 145
Hays, G 218
Hazeltine, E 85
Hazeltine, R 70
Heatherton, T 67
Heatherton, TF 10, 154
Hebscher, M 108
Heerey, E 152
Hegarty II, JP 142
Heisz, JJ 79, 163
Heitmann, CY 154, 209
Helie, S 157, 196
Hellerstedt, R 51
Hendler, T 11, 152
Henry, M 189
Henson, R 163, 184
Heraldez, D 230
Herbert, C 182
Herdman, A 58, 187, 199
Herman, A 198
Hermans, D 102
Hermans, L 143
Hermsdörfer, J 226
Hernandez, A 56
Hernandez, AE 46, 98, 126,
132, 133
Hernandez, B 230
Hernandez, K 84
Herrmann, B 34
Herron, JE 109
Herve, P-Y 130
Heydari, P 85
Hibar, D 163, 210
Hibar, DP 65, 184
Hickey, C 92
Hickok, G 101, 218
Hiebel, N 185
Higby, E 215
Hikosaka, O 117
Hileman, JD 183
Hilger, K 201
Hillman, CH 135, 183
Hill, PF 194
Hillyard, S 120
Hillyard, SA 35, 64
Hinkley, L 148, 196
Hinkley, LB 189
Hinshaw, S 66
Hiraki, K 90
Hironaga, N 90
Hoagey, DA 96
Hoeft, F 217
Hoffmann, S 35
Hofmeister, P 103

Hof, P 157
Hogan, J 197
Holcomb, P 62, 63
Holcomb, PJ 72, 74, 132
Holiday, KA 148
Holland, S 131, 216
Holman, M 115
Holmes, A 173
Hong, M 166
Hong, X 205
Honma, S 55, 148
Horecka, K 226
Horowitz-Kraus, T 131
Horvath, J 54
Hossain, G 86
Houde, J 55, 170, 198, 227
Houdé, O 91
Housden, C 143
Howser, LC 157
Hoxha, O 151
Hrybouski, S 124
Hsu, C-W 116
Hsu, M 117, 174
Hua, A 71
Huang, J 73
Huang, S-tT 65, 208
Huang, S-TT 206
Huang, W 47
Hua, T 184
Hua, X 10, 163
Hubbard, E 202
Hubbard, EM 56, 146
Hubbard, J 231
Huberth, M 198
Huck, JT 229
Huettel, S 19
Huffman, M 74
Hugdahl, K 147
Huguet, P 98
Humphreys, G 148
Hung, DL 65, 123
Hunter, C 101
Hunter, L 78
Huo, Y 37
Huque, AU 115
Hurley, R 47, 52
Hurst, TM 88
Huskey, R 60
Hutcherson, C 230
Hutchison, RM 168

I
Iacoboni, M 95
Ianni, G 171
Iaria, G 167
Ibrahim, N 56
Iglesias, JE 169
I Hsuan, S 213
Imai, R 85
Inagaki, M 90
Inman, C 50, 123
Iordan, AD 206
Iordan, MC 11, 59
Iosif, A-M 66
Ip, CT 119
Isaac, L 123
Isayama, R 227
Isbell, E 62
Issa, S 114
Ito, R 167
Ivry, R 24, 143, 227

Iyer, J 45

J

Justen, C 182
Just, M 10, 105
J.-W Chen, A 72

Jack, C 163
Jackendoff, R 159
Jack, Jr., CR 140
Jackson, J 71
Jackson, TCJ 54, 94
Jacobs, J 111
Jacobson, AD 169
Jacucci, G 149
Jaehne, E 179
Jahanshad, N 65, 140, 163,
184
Jahn, AL 94
Jameel, L 180, 181
James, GA 50
James, K 83
James, KH 191
James, T 83
Janata, P 193
Janfaza, NC 138
Jantzen, KJ 54
Jantzen, M 54
Jantz, TK 43
Japee, S 148
Jasmin, KM 228
Jeevit, G 227
Jenkins, L 167
Jensen, O 30, 31
Jentink, K 155
Jeon, N 187
Jerram, M 200, 202
Jesso, M 198
Jeyakumar, N 97
Jeye, BM 107
Jha, A 70
Jiang, J 41
Jiang, X 132
Ji, E 205, 213
Jimenez, CR 54, 94
Jin, J 180, 181
Jin, Y 57, 93, 112
Johansson, M 51, 106, 223,
224
Johansson, R 224
Johnson, A 71
Johnson, BR 71
Johnson, CL 10, 111
Johnson, E 144
Johnson, H 41, 99, 126
Johnson, J 136, 194
Johnson, JD 80, 142
Johnson, JS 186
Johnson, K 62, 63
Johnson, M 130
Johnson, MB 215
Johnson, MR 104
Jones, A 205
Jones, BL 117
Jones, L 102, 154
Jones, M 102, 191
Jones, SH 53
Jonker, T 178, 224
Josephs, O 228
Joshi, S 169
Jost, K 43
Juan, C-H 136
Junge, C 216
Jung, H 161
Juslin, P 60

Kacollja, A 79
Kaczmarski, H 91
Kafadar, K 191
Kahana, M 179
Kahane, P 64
Kalisch, R 67
Kalla, R 166
Kallianpur, K 140
Kamani, Z 160
Kamigaki, T 185
Kam, JWY 36
KAM, KM 81
Kamp, S-M 50
Kaneko, Y 90
Kangas, K 65, 180
Kanjilia, S 97
Kanjlia, S 201
Kanske, P 150
Kantner, J 166
Kanwisher, N 32
Karanian, JM 80, 107
Kark, S 51
Karlsson, L 60
Karuparthy, L 109
Karydas, AM 37
Kasai, T 91, 187
Kastner, AK 125
Katahira, K 134
Kato, N 231
Kauffmann, L 190
Kaufman, DAS 99, 114, 207
Kaur, N 81
Kawa, K 134
Kawasaki, M 36
Kayser, A 97
Kayser, AS 174
Keilholz, SD 100, 193
Keith, CM 99
Keller, AS 90
Kelley, T 59
Kelley, W 67
Kelley, WM 10, 154
Kemmer, L 218
Kemmotsu, N 169
Kemp, C 10, 105
Kennedy, D 168
Kennedy, DP 11, 38, 96
Kennedy-Higgins, D 197
Kennedy, JT 84
Kennedy, KM 78, 83, 96
Kennett, S 11, 199
Kensinger, E 51, 106, 207
Kensinger, EA 165
Kenworthy, L 145
Ken, Y 86
Kersey, A 88
Keshabyan, A 137
Kessel, D 173
Khan, A 157
Kharitonova, M 37
Khawaja, F 80
Khazenzon, AM 37
Khodaparast, N 53
Khorasani, A 230
Kiefer, M 120
Kiefer, TE 106

K

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

237

Author Index
Kieffaber, P 224
Kiehl, KA 27
Kielbasa, A 10, 125
Kiel, LD 117
Ki, JJ 223
Kikumoto, A 215
Kim, ASN 223
Kim, H 117
Kim, J 46, 74, 209
Kim, K 156
Kim, M-S 205, 213
Kim, SA 208
Kim, SH 208
King, D 49
King, M 67
Kinoshita, LM 195
Kippenhan, JS 202
Kiran, S 42, 47
Kirchner, G 22
Kirilko, E 125
Kirsch, L 152
Kirwan, B 109, 141, 166,
210
Kiselev, S 130
Kishida, KT 174
Kitaoka, Y 134
Kita, Y 90
Kiyonaga, A 129
Kleinbaum, AM 94
Klímová, J 103
Knebel, J-F 197
Knecht, A 62
Knight, R 11, 30, 188
Knopik, V 126
Knowlton, B 41
Knowlton, BJ 196
Knutson, K 11, 110, 195
Kobayashi, K 117
Koenigs, M 39
Koen, J 105
Kohen, C 132
Kohl, C 153
Kohler, PJ 168
Köhler, S 50, 82
Kohn, P 202
Koistinen, O-P 94
Kolachana, B 202
Kolarik, B 192
Koldewyn, K 32
Koller, K 111
Komeda, H 36
Kompus, K 147
Kong, D 172
Koplin-Green, M 197
Korinth, S 172
Kort, N 55, 170
Korzyukov, O 56
Kosilo, M 186
Kossman, A 72
Kothare, S 107
Kothur, S 211, 213
Kotov, R 181
Kotz, S 150
Kotz, SA 54
Kovacevic, N 39
Kraemer, DJM 186
Kraemer, HC 195
Krafft, C 66
Kragel, P 166
Kragel, PA 95
Kramer, A 62, 64, 79, 91
Kramer, AF 78, 83, 98, 183

238

2015 Annual Meeting
Kramer, JH 37, 67, 174
Krane, K 120
Kranz, M 62
Krass, K 158
Krastev, S 116
Kraut, MA 79, 178
Kravitz, D 53, 67
Krawczyk, D 24
Krawczyk, DC 53
Krebs, J 161
Krebs, RM 157, 211
Krenzer, W 95
Krieger, D 178
Krieg, SM 73
Krigolson, O 230, 231
Krishnan, A 95
Krishnan, S 216
Kroll, J 158
Kroll, JF 99
Kroll, JL 140
Kronbichler, M 188
Krongold, M 110
Kubit, B 193
Kuerten, AB 101
Kuhl, P 6, 10, 103
Kühn, S 199
Kuipers, J 191
Kulakova, E 190
Kuller, L 162
Kumar, M 86
Kuo, B-C 44
Kuo, W-J 42
Kuperberg, G 73, 122
Kuperberg, GR 39, 134, 159
Kuperman, R 11, 30, 188
Kurdziel, L 78
Kurian, A 168
Kurzrok, J 122
Kusumoto, K 40
Kutas, M 7, 46, 47, 73, 103,
160, 191, 218
Ku, Y 42
Kwisthout, J 84
Kwon, D 135, 164

L
LaBar, KS 95
Lacerda, F 189
Lacey, S 116
Lachat, F 94
Lachaux, J 64
La Croix, A 218
Làdavas, E 66
Lagarrigue, A 104
Lahnakoski, J 94
LaHue, S 47
Lai, P 36, 217
Laka, I 132
Lakatos, P 30
Lamarr, T 44
Lambrecq, V 107
Lam, M 74, 158
Lamme, V 214
Lamm Ph.D., C 210
Landi, N 189
Landman, B 37
Lane, C 97
Lane, CT 201
Lane, S 42
Langford, Z 211
Langs, G 125

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Lan, Y-J 131
Lapate, RC 124
Lapp, LK 62
LaRocque, KF 136
Larson, C 56
Larson-Prior, LJ 207
Larsson, E-M 50
Latif, N 152
Lau, E 39
Laumann, TO 72
Laurienti, P 214
Lavan, N 114, 228
Lawson, GM 100
Lawyer, L 44
Laxer, K 11, 188
Laxton, AW 174
Layton, R 177
Leavett, R 202
Le, BT 223
Leckey, M 45
Ledoux, K 48, 160
Lee, A 108
Lee, ACH 11, 82, 139, 167
Leech, R 216
Lee, D 149
Lee, F 204
Lee, G 216
Lee, H-J 42
Lee, HK 188
Lee, I-C 182
Lee, J 77
Lee, JK 78
Lee, J-M 141
Lee, K 214
Lee, K-M 205, 213
Lee, M-C 65, 206, 208
Lee, S 60
Lee, SE 37
Lee, S-H 53
Lee, S-K 108, 139, 142
Lee, T-H 209
Lee, YM 208
Lee, Y-S 58, 75
Legault, J 131
Leiker, A 171
Leiker, EK 80
Leitner, J 40
Leland, D 64
Leong, YC 175
Leppert, K 164
Lepsien, J 34
Lerma-Usabiaga, G 169
Lesh, T 93, 133
Levine, B 49, 97, 107, 108,
137, 221
Levin, EJ 176, 177
Levine, SM 115
Levy, B 38
Levy, DA 135
Levy, RM 167
Lewenstein, A 153
Lewis, F 63
Lewis, GA 75
Lewis, J 110, 120
Lewis, LJ 137
Lewis, M 202
Liang, L 208
Liao, K 72
Libby, L 110
Libby, LA 222
Li, C 170
Li, D 166

Liederman, J 196
Liefooghe, B 128
Liew, S-L 85
Li, H 155
Li, HC 112
Li, IH 167
Li, J 166
Lima, C 66, 147
Lim, KO 97
Lim, S-J 34
Lin, A 211
Lin, C-HJ 196
Lindenberger, U 18, 199
Lindsey, A 71
Lin, H-Y 155
Lin, Y 43
Lin, Z 63
Li, P 131, 132, 188
Lissek, S 10, 125
Liss, JM 159
List, S 116
Litcofsky, KA 133
Litvan, I 218
Liu, A 107
Liu, H 55
Liu, J 207
Liu, L 216
Liu*, L 216
Liu, P 55
Liu, T-L 123
Liu, Y 205
Livingstone, AC 35
Li, W 10, 55, 58
Li, X 111
Lobier, M 206
Lochman, D 201
Lockhart, S 41
Lo, C-M 136
Lohnas, L 110
Lohrenz, T 174
Lohse, K 171
Lolli, SL 153
London, E 208
London, RE 91
Longanecker, G 93
Long, D 133
Long, N 179
Longstreth, WT 162
Lopera, F 211
Lopez, BA 10, 141, 164
Lopez, OL 162
Lopez, RB 10, 154
Lordo, DN 114
Lorentz, E 93, 189, 200
Lori, A 183
Lorist, M 204
Losin, ER 95
Loui, P 45, 112, 153, 161,
170, 197
Love, T 218
Lovett, V 191
Lowe, MX 214
Low, K 192
Low, KA 184
Loya, F 72
Lu, C 216
Lucas, HD 78
Luciana, M 84, 97
Luck, D 213
Luck, S 173
Ludersdorfer, P 188
Luechinger, R 99

Luethi, M 99
Lujan, C 95
Luk, G 71
Luks, TL 47
Lulic, T 226, 227
Luo, H 113
Luo, Y 93
LU, Q 142
Lusitg, C 63
Lustig, C 156
Lustig, H 82
Luu, P 196
Lyday, R 214
Lynall, M-E 167
Lynch, P 102
Lyons, KM 62

M
Maass, A 110
MacDonald, J 149
Machado, N 190
Mackey, A 132
Mackey, AP 144
MacLean, A 135
Maclin, EL 184
MacQueen, D 155
Macrae, F 228
MacSweeney, M 74
Madan, C 124, 170
Madden, D 130
Maddox, WT 69, 126
Madore, M 72
Madsen, SK 10, 163
Maess, B 34
Maharjan, S 35
Mahon, B 54
Mahon, BZ 10, 52
Mahyari, A 28
Ma, I 155
Maier, M 66
Maier, ME 127, 212
Maillet, D 77, 135, 164
Main, KL 123
Mair, R 168
Majere, I 131
Makeig, S 144
Malhotra, A 39
Malins, J 45, 168
Malykhin, N 124
Malyutina, S 101
Mamiya, P 10, 103
Mandelli, ML 189
Manfredi, M 191
Mangels, J 151
Mangun, GR 133, 205
Mangun, R 204
Mangus, JM 60
Mann Koepke, K 22
Manselle, W 127
Man, V 179
Maouene, M 103
Mapelli, D 117
Marino, C 217
Marinsek, N 145
Maris, E 76
Markant, J 149
Marklund, E 189
Marshall, A 65
Marshall, C 74
Marshall, PJ 204
Marslen-Wilson, W 73, 100

2015 Annual Meeting
Marslen-Wilson, WD 103
Martarelli, CS 166
Mårtensson, J 199
Martin, C 50, 170
Martinez, A 64
Martin, J-C 210
Martin, N 209
Martinovic, J 186
Massey, A 68, 213
Massey, AT 213, 225
Massias, D 172
Massimini, M 224
Massone, M 197
Mast, FW 166
Mastusz, PJ 197
Mather, M 209
Mathewson, KM 11, 171
Mathiak, K 229
Mathias, B 114
Matland, R 146
Matsen, J 84
Matsuzaki, N 58
Mattavelli, G 158, 225
Mattingly, S 137
Mattson, JT 78
Matusz, PJ 90
Mayr, U 43, 215, 231
Mayseless, N 11, 152
Mazaheri, A 90
McAuley, E 78, 83, 91
McCarthy-Jones, S 229
McCarthy, T 195
McCauley, E 98
McClain, R 99
McClure, S 66
McCormick, K 116
McCuddy, T 174
McCuddy, W 59
McCullough, AM 222
McDonald, CG 41, 98, 198,
212
McDonald, JJ 35, 64
McDonough, I 141
McDowell, A 132
McDowell, J 70
McGarry, MDJ 10, 111
McGeary, J 126
McGettigan, C 147, 228
McGhee, A 136
McGinty, G 71
McGrath, LM 88
McGregor, K 170
McIntosh, AR 39, 97
McKay, CC 176
McKelvey, K 167
McKim, T 157
McKinley, R 43
McMains, S 168
McQuaid, GA 75
McQuiggan, DA 137
McQuire, M 76
Mecklinger, A 50, 106, 135,
220
Meck, WH 229
Medeiros-Ward, N 62
Medina, A 125
Medina, J 84
Meekings, S 114
Melcher, D 86
Melcón, M 173, 206
Melo, H 60
Meltzer, J 102

Author Index
Ménard, L 197
Mencl, E 45
Mencl, WE 168
Mendoza-Denton, R 40
Meng, X 216
Mennes, M 155
Menon, V 88
Mercure, E 216
Merrick, C 43
Merwin, S 164
Mesite, L 71
Mesulam, M 47
Mesulam, M-M 105
Metzger, BA 11, 171
Metzler, S 120
Meulemans, T 91
Meyer, B 73
Meyering, E 128
Meyer, K 204
Mezher, A 10, 65, 163
Mezher, AF 140
Michael, R 49
Michael, W 216
Michel, C 16
Michel, J 210
Mickleborough, M 93, 189,
200
Mickleborough, MJS 36
Mickley Steinmetz, K 93
Midgley, KJ 72, 74, 132
Mies, G 155
Miles, SA 138
Millán, Jd 17
Miller, BL 67, 174, 189
Miller, L 44
Miller, M 49, 166, 171
Miller, MB 10, 141, 145,
164, 167
Miller, P 205
Miller, ZA 189
Millin, R 104
Mills, D 68, 156, 216
Milton, A 227
Minotti, L 64
Miranda, R 219
Miranda, RA 138
Mirzabekov, J 124
Mitchell, J 96
Mittelberg, I 229
Mizuiri, D 55, 148, 189, 196
Moda, I 231
Mohammed, A 83
Mohanty, A 180, 181
Molenaar, P 188
Molfese, P 45, 168
Molinaro, N 158, 219
Mollaei, F 226
Moll, K 202
Molteni, M 217
Monette, J 191
Montague, PR 174
Montechiare, I 206
Monti, JM 78, 98
Moody B.S., S 210
Moody, T 41
Moons, WG 71
Moore, DM 88
Moraes, AMd 101
Moran, J 173
Moran, R 77
Moreno, S 223
Morgan, K 196

Morgan-Short, K 132
morioka, s 85
Morioka, S 151
Morrens, M 152
Morris, J 106
Morrison, A 70
Morrison, RG 144, 146,
158, 181
Morris, R 45
Morsella, E 43, 150
Moscovitch, M 165, 167,
221
Moser, J 27, 43
Mosner, M 145
Moss, J 117
Mota, MB 101
Mudar, R 71
Mudar, RA 79
Muehlberger, A 210
Mueller, S 21, 182
Muggleton, N 136
Mühlberger, A 125
Mukai, I 148
Mukherjee, P 47, 181
Mullen, S 71
Müller, D 60
Muller, M 156
Müller, R-A 121
Mulligan, E 164
Mulligan, N 78
Muncy, N 141
Munhall, KG 152
Munoz-Rubke, F 191
Mun, SK 207
Munson, B 56
Murai, T 36
Muricchio, T 212
Müri, R 166
Murphy, C 169
Murphy, GL 75
Murray, E 10, 52
Murray, J 195
Murray, M 16
Murray, MM 90, 197
Murty, V 106
Musacchia, G 45
Musz, E 48
Mwangi, B 65, 140, 210
Myers, EB 189

Neophytou, E 216
Nespoli, GA 198
Neumeister, P 154, 209
Neville, H 62
Newbury, DF 202
Newman, AJ 104, 132, 215,
217
Newman, SD 88
Newport, EL 132
Newsome, RN 167
Ng, A 225
Ng, R 156
Nguyen, MT 95
Niblett, SP 94
Nieminen, JO 224
Niendam, T 93
Nieuwland, M 190
Nir, T 163
Nir, TM 140, 184
Nir, TN 10, 163
Nishida, M 58
Nishimura, M 162
Niv, Y 175
Niziolek, C 170, 227
Nocera, J 170
Noda, A 230
Noh, S 126
Nolan, TS 207
Nomi, JS 95
Nomura, I 231
Norcia, AM 168
Nordin, K 50
Norris, D 174
Northstone, K 202
Notebaert, W 85, 121, 143,
177
Noto, T 225
Novakovic-Agopian, T 72
Nu, C 69, 208
Nueckel, K 210
Nugiel, T 51, 52
Nummenmaa, L 94
Nusslock, R 230
Nuttall, H 197
Nuutinen, MR 146
Nyazika, S 121
Nyberg, L 60, 186
Nygaard, L 116
Nyhus, E 149

N

O

Naaz, F 212
Nadel, L 108
Nagamatsu, L 62
Nagarajan, S 55, 148, 170,
196, 198, 227
Nagarajan, SS 189
Nagata, N 134
Nahum, M 124
Nah, Y 108, 142
Narayanan, K 85
Nathalie, V 183
Nauvel, TJ 11, 148
Navarro-Torres, C 158
Navia, BA 140
Naylor, ER 201
Nechvatal, J 123
Nechvatal, JM 49
Neda Jahanshad, N 10, 163
Nedeltcheva, N 183
Negreira, A 200

Oberg, S 138
Obermeier, C 150
Obler, LK 215
Obleser, J 34, 55
O'Boyle, M 187
Obradović, J 58
O'Bryan, S 178
O'Connell, M 30
O'Dell, D 214
O'Doherty, J 60
Ofen, N 58, 162
O'Hara, N 59
O'Hara, R 122
Ohki, T 90
Okumura, Y 187
Oliver, M 189
Olsen, F 124
Olsen, RK 48, 165
Olson, I 52
Olson, IR 51

Omura, K 40
O'Neal, J 37
O'Neil, EB 82, 167
O'Neil, G 71
O'Neil, J 105
O'Neil, K 104
O'Neill, M 82
Onoda, K 135
Oomon, K 151
Op de Macks, Z 97
Orädd, G 186
Ortego, K 198
Ortiz-Mantilla, S 44, 45,
225
O'Shea, A 87
Osher, DE 32, 176, 177
Ostarek, M 147
Osumi, M 85
Ott, CR 159
Otten, LJ 106
Oudiette, D 218
Ouslis, NE 214
Özer, D 190
Özkay, Y 138
Ozturk, Y 84

P
Paap, K 41, 99
Paap, KR 126
Paige, LE 194
Palac, D 71
Paller, K 52
Paller, KA 218
Palmer, C 114
Palumbo, RT 181
Palva, JM 149, 206
Palva, S 149, 206
Pangelinan, M 97
Paniukov, D 178
Pantelis, PC 11, 38
Papagno, C 158
Papaioannou, O 115, 198
Paracchini, S 202
Parasuraman, R 41, 43, 67,
92, 98
Parbhu, BA 168
Pardasani, SD 156
Park, DC 83
Park, H 31, 80, 81
Parkinson, C 94
Park, J 155
Park, S-Y 108
Park, T 87
Park, YS 161
Parra, LC 223
Parrish, TB 162
Parvizi, J 11, 30, 188
Passow, S 147
Pasvanis, S 135, 164
Patael, S 217
Patel, A 73
Patel, D 114
Patel, K 181
Patel, N 37, 80, 192
Patel, R 164
Pauli, P 125, 210
Paus, T 130
Pavlova, M 83
Pavone, EF 222
Payne, BR 76, 159
Payne, H 74

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

239

Author Index
Payne, J 137, 207
Payne, L 35, 90
Paz-Alonso, PM 169, 189,
192
Pazo-Álvarez, P 173
Pearlstein, MM 177
Pedersen, S 101
Pedisich, I 179
Pedro, CMA 81
Pei Yi, L 213
Pellicciari, R 227
Pell, L 109
Pell, MD 150
Peltola, T 94
Pennell, C 202
Penolazzi, B 228
Penton, T 153
Pergolizzi, D 50
Perico, C 176
Perrone-Bertolotti, M 64,
190
Perry, A 11, 152
Persson, J 50, 136, 166
Perwez, N 185
Peters, B 11, 185
Petersen, A 148
Petersen, N 208
Petersen, SE 72
Peters, S 225
Pettigrew, K 202
Petton, M 64
Peyrin, C 91
Pfeifer, K 95
Phelps, EA 168
Philippi, C 39
Phillips, J 104
Phillips, ME 104
Phillips, PEM 174
Phillips, S 63
Piai, V 76
Piazza, C 217
Piazza, E 86
Pichat, C 190
Picklesimer, M 78
Pierce, J 70
Pierpaoli, C 171
Pietri, M 78
Pineda, D 211
Pirogovsky Turk, E 183
Pischedda, D 145
Pisoni, A 158, 225
Pitcher, D 25, 26, 171
Pitts, M 115, 119, 120, 228
Pizzie, RG 186
Pleydell-Pearce, C 227
Poeppel, D 20, 55, 75, 112,
113
Poh, JH 172
Poirel, N 91
Poliakoff, E 115
Politzer-Ahles, S 72, 134
Pollack, M 68
Ponzio, A 209
Pool, E 127
Popov, M 162
Porcelli, AJ 59, 174
Porges, E 87
Porges, EC 97
Pornpattananangkul, N
230
Porto, F 62, 63, 83
Postle, B 128

240

2015 Annual Meeting
Postle, BR 44, 119, 224
Poston, K 65, 176
Potter, G 130
Potts, S 59, 174
Preuss, N 168
Pribadi, M 37
Price, GR 111
Price, M 194
Price, N 196
Pritchard, A 145
Pruitt, Z 204
Prychitko, S 229
Prystauka, Y 219
Pudhiyidath, A 79
Pugh, K 45
Pugh, KR 168
Pu, H 74
Pujara, M 39
Pulsifer, BH 177
Purcell, JJ 74

Q
Qian, Z 161
Qi, T 216
Qi, Z 130
Quak, M 185
Quandt, L 58
Quatieri, T 140
Quiñones, I 189
Quirk, C 35

R
Raab, H 202
Rabin, JS 79
Rabinovici, G 189
Rabipour, S 221
Radulescu, A 175
Rafal, R 111
Rafal, RD 211
Rafferty, H 145
Ragland, JD 222
Rainey, VR 158
Rajah, MN 135, 164
Rajah, N 77
Rajaram, S 181
Raji, CA 162
Rajsic, J 128
Ramanathan, P 71
ramdani, c 154
Ramos, AI 132
Ramos-Nuñez, AI 98, 126,
133
Ramsey, R 151, 153
Ranasinghe, K 55
Ranganath, C 110, 128, 220,
221, 222
Rangel, A 230
Rankin, KP 67
Rao, NK 117, 178
Rao, V 124
Rapkin, A 208
Rapp, B 74
Rapuano, K 67
Rasch, B 99
Raskin, SA 81
Ratnam, R 226
Rattinger, M 46
Ravaja, N 149
Raymond, J 24
Raz, N 21

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Reagh, Z 10, 22, 52
Reaves, S 63
Reber, J 151
Reber, PJ 218
Redcay, E 77
Reddy Pasham, N 113
Reed, C 64
Reed, R 208
Reese, ED 96
Reeve, R 63
Reichard, SM 120
Reif, A 125
Reilly, J 36, 217
Reilly, M 190
Reiner, M 57
Reinhard, E 125
Reinke, K 122
Rekittke, L-M 229
Renoult, L 221
Resnick, S 37
Reuter-Lorenz, PA 17
Reuter, S 65
Reverberi, C 145
Ribaut, N 99
Richard, T 10, 103
Richey, JA 121
Rieck, JR 83
Riehl, J 168
Riepl, RF 120
Ries, S 11, 188
Riggall, AC 44
Riggins, T 77, 164
Righi, L 178
Rigon, A 68
Rimrodt, S 130
Ringel, F 73
Ring, S 202
Rinker, D 184
Ritchey, M 221, 222
Riva, V 217
Rivest, J 165
Rizer, W 210, 229
Roach, A 41
Robbins, A 179
Roberts, DM 41, 98, 198,
212
Roberts, K 39
Robertson, L 35
Robertson, LC 92
Robin, D 56
Robin, J 165
Robson, S 215
Rochet, N 98
Roch, N 156, 216
Rodrigue, KM 96
Rodriguez, N 72
Roehm, D 161, 187
Roelofs, A 76, 102
Roesler, C 45
Rogalski, E 47
Rogalsky, C 218
Rogers, C 35
Rogers, S 70
ROGERS, TT 142
Rogosch, F 156
Rohowetz, LJ 142
Rohrmeier, M 73
Rolheiser, T 52
Rolheiser, TM 51
Romero Lauro, LJ 158, 225
Rommers, J 76
Rooks, J 70

Rosa-Leyra, D 58
Rosanova, M 225
Rosburg, T 106
Rose, A 124
Rose, N 128
Rosenbaum, RS 48, 79, 82,
107, 128, 165
Rosenbaum, S 223
Rosenberg, J 73
Rosenberg-Lee, M 88
Rosen, H 189
Rosen, ML 176
Rosen, S 113, 147
Rose, NS 44
Rossi, E 99, 158, 219
Rossi, F 11, 61
Rossillon, M 71
Rossi, S 222
Ross, JM 69, 143
Ross, R 95
Rotblatt, LJ 183
Rothermich, K 150
Rothman, J 161
Rottman, B 23
Rouhinen, S 149
Rowland, L 48
Rubin, D 166
Rugg, M 105
Rugg, MD 17, 18, 78, 137
Runkle, M 204
Ruppel, J 128
Russell, A 151
Russo, FA 198
Ryals, A 105
Ryan, JD 79, 137
Ryan, L 134
Ryan, T 36
Rybkina, J 86
Rypma, B 64

S
Saad, ZS 11, 195
Sabbe, B 152
Sabharwal, A 181
Sablich, S 57, 87
Saez, I 174
Salazar-López, E 226
Saletin, JM 195
Samaha, J 44, 119
Sam, E 46, 74
Samejima, K 231
Sams, M 94
Samson, S 107
Samu, D 184
Sanchez, DJ 195
Sánchez - Pastor, E 172
Sandberg, C 75
Sanfey, A 11, 61
San Martin, R 205
Sanossian, N 85
Sanson, L 199
Santander, T 10, 141, 164
Sapiro, M 72
Sargent, J 67
Sari-Sarraf, N 59
Sarkar, A 125
Sathian, K 116
Sattizahn, J 43
Satyshur, M 148
Saunders, R 182
Savord, A 229

Sawi, O 41, 126
Saxe, R 32
Sayehli, S 218
Saygin, Z 32
Sazma, M 186
Scerif, G 204
Schaadt, AK 87
Schacherer, J 85
Schaefer, SM 94
Schaeffer, J 80, 81
Schaeffer, T 123
Schalk, G 11, 188
Schapiro, R 182
Scheldrup, M 43
Schelonka, K 119
Schendel, K 35, 92
Scheres, A 155
Scheuplein, A-L 135
Scheurich, R 54
Schevernels, H 121, 157,
177
Schiffer, A-M 127
Schiff, ND 11, 148
Schiff, S 117
Schifitto, G 140
Schlaug, G 112, 170
Schlegel, A 42
Schlesinger, KJ 167
Schmidt, B 68
Schmidt, NB 27
Schmidt, TT 185
Schmithorst, V 216
Schmitz, T 29
Schneider, D 11, 35, 129
Schneider-Garces, N 184
Schretlen, D 129
Schroeder, C 17, 99
Schröger, E 150
Schubert, M 10, 141, 164,
166
Schubotz, R 127
Schultz, D 201
Schulz, C 38
Schumacher, E 70, 209
Schumacher, EH 100, 193
Schwaiger, BJ 226
Schwarb, H 10, 111
Schwartze, M 54
Schwarzbach, J 115
Schwarz, I-C 189
Schwarzkopp, T 43
Schwarzlose, R 58
Schweitzer, J 66
Scott, S 20, 66, 114, 147
Scott, SK 228
Seckin, M 47
Seger, C 173, 230
Seipel, B 190
Sekuler, R 35, 90, 205
Sel, A 172
Selarka, D 107
Seliger, JM 94
Seli, P 178
Sellers, J 93
Selmeczy, D 81
Semmelmann, K 32
Serences, JT 108
Seres, P 124
Serino, A 200
Serra, M 59
Seymour, B 60
Shafer, A 124

2015 Annual Meeting
Shafer, V 34
Shafto, M 44
Shakal, SKM 53
Shamay-Tsoory, S 11, 152
Shamloo, F 157
Shantz, K 131
Sharif-Askary, B 166
Sharma, S 53
Sha, SJ 37
Shattuck, KF 132
Shdo, SM 67
Shears, C 46, 74, 158
Sheiman, J 115
Sheldon, S 49
Shen, C-KJ 134
Shen, G 129
Sheng, T 49, 123
Shen, J 128
Shen, L 168
Sherman, B 105
Shields, GS 71
Shih, P 11, 43
Shikuma, CM 140
Shiller, DM 226
Shin, H 200
Shinkareva, S 209
Shinkareva, SV 104
Shin, N-Y 108, 139, 142
Shin, YS 139
Shi, Z 39
Shrem, T 57
Shtyrov, Y 100
Shulman, Z 150
Siclari, F 224
Siegel, J 141
Siegel, JT 78
Siepmann, C 56
Sigvardt, KA 69
Sikora, K 102
Silton, RL 158, 181
Silver, A 231
Silver, M 86
Silver, MA 127
Simon-Dack, S 84
Simone, P 135
Simon, G 91
Simons, J 163, 229
Simons, JS 220
Simpson, NH 202
Singhal, A 121, 170
Singhal, G 179
Singh, P 134
Sitek, K 140
Skiker, K 103
Slade, T 207
Sligte, I 214
Slinker, E 64
Slotnick, S 51
Slotnick, SD 80, 107
Smallwood, J 178, 224
Smilek, D 178
Smirnov, D 94
Smith, AK 58
Smith, C 191
Smith, DM 100, 193
Smith, GNL 156
Smith, M 74
Smith, VM 79
Snagg, A 152
Snowling, MJ 202
Soares, J 65, 140, 210
Söderlund, H 50, 136, 166

Author Index
Sohal, V 124
Sokolov, A 24, 25, 83
Solinger, LA 223
Soman, S 49, 123, 195
Somers, DC 176, 177
Somerville, L 173
Song, S 11, 195
Soni, S 198
Sontag, S 161
Sorond, F 83
Soskey, L 149
Soulières, I 183
Southgate, V 229
South, M 141, 210
Spaak, E 31
Spalding, K 53
Spaniol, J 62
Spapé, M 149
Specht, K 147
Spector, F 115, 199
Spence, JS 79
Spencer, R 78
Spilka, MJ 121
Splan, ED 94
Split, M 52
Spurling, A 84
Sroka, C 216
Staley, S 139
Stancak, A 111, 228
Stanley, M 214
Stanton, MV 49
Stark, C 22
Starling, A 159
Starrett, MJ 44
Stasiuk, B 138
Staum-Casasanto, L 219
Steel, A 11, 195
Steele, V 27
Steele, VR 27, 28
Steindam, C 145
Stein, DJ 140
Steinhauser, M 120, 127
Steinmetzger, K 113
Steinschneider, M 34
Stening, E 166
Stephan, B 87
Stephens, M 115
Stephenson, K 210
Stevens, M 71
Stevenson, J 10, 103
Stevenson, RA 214
Stewart, HJ 147
Sticca, R 158
Stickel, A 134
Stiles, A 77
Stilla, R 116
Stillerman, B 39
Stillesjö, S 60
Stites, MC 48, 76, 159
Stivers, J 205
St-Laurent, M 48
Stockdale, L 181
Stockert, A 54
Stolle, D 116
Stone, K 57
Stone, S 172
Stoodley, CJ 88
Storch, B 122
Störmer, VS 35, 64
Strand, J 198
Straube, T 38, 154, 209
Striemer, C 92

Strother, S 97
Stroup, ML 207
Sturm, VE 67
Suarez-Coalla, MP 189
Suarez, I 211
Sudikoff, EL 114
Su, I-f 188
Sullivan-Toole, H 122
Sumida, CA 183
Summerfield, C 8
Sung, K 224
Sun, P 119
Sun, SZ 86
Sun, Y-H 182
Susan, B 183
Susan, J 155
Sussman, T 180, 181
Sutherland, ME 130
Sutherland, RJ 138, 206
Sutterer, DW 108
Sutterer, MJ 207
Sutton, BP 184
Sutton, CA 68
Sutton, S 155
Suvrathan, A 24
Suwazono, S 218
Suzuki, S 11, 56, 90
Swaab, T 131, 133
Swaab, TY 103
Swain, L 88
Swanson, K 111
Sweeney, J 57
Sweis, A 144
Swett, K 37
Swierkot, A 164
Szczepanski, S 30
Szekely, A 180, 181
Szpunar, KK 82
Szymula, L 69

T
Tagarelli, KM 75, 132
Tager-Flusberg, H 130
Takada, LT 37
Takahashi, H 90
Takai, O 199
Takarae, Y 57, 87
Takei, Y 90
Takeya, R 91
Talley, M 109
Talsma, D 91, 185, 211
Tambini, A 192
Tan, CH 184
Tanguay, A 221
Tanigawa, N 73
Tanner, D 131, 218, 219
Tanner, J 79
Tao, JX 11, 56
Tata, M 34
Tata, MS 198
Tatter, SB 174
Tavakoli, P 221
Taylor, H 173
Taylor, J 230
Taylor, M 201
Teng, X 112
Thakral, PP 137
Thavabalasingam, S 11, 82,
139, 167
Thengone, DJ 11, 148
Thierry, G 102, 191

Thieu, M 221
Thomas, A 111, 228
Thomas, C 84, 171
Thompson, A 171
Thompson, CK 162, 220
Thompson, J 145
Thompson, JC 98
Thompson, K 184
Thompson, L 179
Thompson, M 189, 198
Thompson, P 163, 169,
202, 210
Thompson, PM 10, 65, 112,
140, 162, 163, 184
Thompson-Schill, SL 48
Thompson, WR 197
Thornton, M 96
Thothathiri, M 46
Thut, G 31
Tian, X 113
Tibon, R 135
Tierney, M 110
Timmer, K 212
Tobimatsu, S 90
Tobon, C 211
Todd, R 39
Tokowicz, N 160
Tolentino, JC 183
Tompary, A 80
Tononi, G 224
Toomarian, E 202
Toomarian, EY 146
Tootell, A 213
Tootell, AV 213, 225
Top, N 210
Toro-Serey, C 131
Torrence, R 65, 122, 180
Toscano, J 105
Touroutoglou, A 11, 66,
121
Towle, VL 11, 56
Townsend, J 156, 183
Tran, CT 56
Tranel, D 53, 124, 151, 207,
221
Traxler, M 131, 133
Traxler, MJ 103
Tree, J 10, 152
Treffalls, J 177, 201
Trefler, A 171
Trefor, R 102
Trelle, A 163
Tremblay, A 217
Trempler, I 127
Tricomi, E 122, 150
Troiani, V 51
Troup, LJ 95
Troyer, M 103
Trujillo, AJ 37
Truong, G 39
Tsai, K-J 134
Tsai, P-S 65
Tsalamlal, MY 210
Tse, P 42
Tubridy, SM 104
Tucker, D 120, 196
Tully, L 93
Turan, N 138
Turkeltaub, PE 75, 132
Turken, AU 92
Turnbull, O 191
Turner, B 70, 166

Turner, BO 60, 141, 145,
167
Tusch, E 62, 63, 83
Tüttenberg, S 56
Tyler, L 44
Tyler, LK 10, 17, 45, 184
Tyszka, JM 11, 38, 96
Tzeng, OJ-L 65, 123

U
Uc, E 85
Ücel, Uİ 138
Ueda, K 231
Ueda, R 40
Ueno, M 218
Ullman, MT 75, 132, 138,
219
Ulrich, M 120
Uncapher, M 221
Uncapher, MR 107
Unger, A 51, 52
Ungerleider, L 171
Ungerleider, LG 148
Unni, AK 96
Uno, T 187
Urbach, TP 73, 160
Ustine, C 39
Utianski, R 159

V
Valcour, V 169
Valcour, VG 140
Valdez, GE 156
Vallar, G 225
Vallila-Rohter, S 47
Vance, J 43
van den Berg, B 176, 194,
204
van den Bos, W 66
Vandenbroucke, A 214
Vanderaspoilden, V 91
Van der Borght, L 121
van Diepen, R 90
Van Etten, EJ 183
Vangkilde, S 148
van Hell, JG 133
Van Hell, JG 218
van Heuven, W 102
van Heuven, WJB 101
van Holstein, M 155
van Koningsbruggen, M 92
van Lamsweerde, A 186
VanMeter, JW 132
Vannest, J 216
Vannorsdall, T 129
Van Opstal, F 59
Van Petten, C 160
van Rooij, I 84
VanRullen, R 113
van Son, V 11, 61
van Steenburgh, JJ 129
Van Vleet, T 124
Varangis, E 42
Varga, NL 53
Vargas, B 159
Varma, S 103
Varvaris, M 129
Vassena, E 173
Vaughan-Evans, A 102
Vaughn, K 56

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

241

Author Index
Vaughn, KA 98, 126, 133
Vazquez, D 132
Vehtari, A 94
Vendetti, M 144
Ventura, M 170
Ventura, MI 69
Verfaellie, M 76
Verguts, T 59, 61, 173
Verhees, M 93
Ver Steeg, G 10, 163
Vesia, M 227
Vettel, J 166
Vickery, T 68, 116
vidal, f 154
Vidal, F 98
Vidal, J 64
Vidal, JR 190
Vinci-booher, S 83
Vinogradov, S 196
Visconti di Oleggio Castello, M 87
Vissers, C 93
Vogel, EK 108
Vogelsang, DA 220
Voineskos, A 39
Vonk, JMJ 215
Vossel, K 55
Voss, J 10, 37, 47, 105, 136
Voss, JL 109, 164
Voss, MW 68, 98, 183, 207
Voytek, B 225
Vukovic, N 104
Vyas, K 180, 181

W
Wachutka, J 104
Wada, A 92
Wade, B 169
Wager, TD 95
Wagner, AD 107, 136, 165,
221
Wagner, GM 183
Wagner, M 34
Wagner, V 46, 56
Wakschlag, L 37
Walker, J 192
Wallace, AT 35
Wallace, L 164
Walsh, EC 94
Waltzman, D 195
Wang, C 202
Wang, H 119
Wang, I 134
Wang, J 10, 136
Wang, J-L 205
Wang, JX 109
Wang, L 111, 155, 177
Wang, O 60
Wang, R 132
Wang, S 73, 81
Wang, S-F 222
Wang, TH 78
Wang, W-C 49
Wang, Y 169
Wan, N 220
Wan, NJA 129
Wansard, M 91
Wantz, AL 166
Warden, C 176
Ward, J 115
Ward, L 114

242

2015 Annual Meeting
Ward, LM 36
Ward, R 151
Waring, JD 122
Warren, DE 53, 221
Warstadt, N 140
Wascher, E 11, 35, 129, 147
Wassermann, E 110
Wassermann, EM 11, 195
Watson, C 37
Watson, P 80, 226
Watson, PD 78, 135
Watts, K 50
Weaver, SM 126
Weber, K 39
Weber, P 11, 188
Weber, R 60
Wedell, D 209
Weed, K 88
Weekes, B 188
Wegier, P 62
Wehe, H 139
Weidemann, C 10, 152
Weigelt, S 32
Weinberg, L 193
Weiner, K 26
Weiner, M 163
Weiner, MW 140
Weintraub, S 105
Weisberg, S 116
Wei, S-M 202
Weissheimer, J 101
Weissman, DH 155
Welcome, S 102
Wendelken, C 77, 78
Wendelken-Riegelhaupt,
L 169
Wendell, D 146
Weng, TB 98
Wenke, D 128
Wen, Y 101
Wenzel, W 209
Westerberg, CE 220
Westerfield, M 156
Westerhausen, R 147
Westmoreland, R 208
Wexler, K 130
Wheatley, T 94
Whitehouse, AJO 202
White, JP 174
Whiting, C 73
Whiting, CM 103
Whitson, H 130
Wiebe, S 179
Wiebe, SA 62
Wiese, E 67
Wieser, MJ 125
Wilbern, D 229
Wilbur, R 161
Wilding, EL 51, 109
Wilkey, ED 111
Wilkinson, L 11, 195
Williams, AN 51
Williams, E 37
Williams, JN 104
Williams, L 215
Williams, RS 62
Willie, J 123
Wilson, K 128
Wilson, KE 214
Wimmer, H 188
Winfrey, H 220
Wing, EA 192

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

Wingfield, A 35, 104
Winnik, S 153
Winsler, K 132
Winstein, C 85
Wiseheart, M 223
Wisman Weil, L 130
Witcher, MP 174
Witherspoon, B 157
Wittenberg, E 159
Wlotko, EW 48, 134, 159
Wohlschläger, A 226
Wojciehowski, H 201
Woldorff, M 194, 204, 205
Woldorff, MG 34, 119, 176,
177, 211
Wolf, D 229
Womack, KB 79
Wong, CN 98
Wong, K 86
Wong Kee You, AMB 223
Woo, C-W 95
Woodall, K 84
Wood, K 174
Woods, A 87
Woods, AJ 97
Woollacott, M 127
Worthy, D 174
Wosham, A 67
Wöstmann, M 34
Wright, B 166
Wright, H 111, 228
Wu, AD 196
Wu, DH 65, 162
Wu, R 204
Wu, S 11, 56
Wu, T 157
Wylie, E 122
Wylie, G 123
Wylie, GR 126
Wynn, M 37

X
Xavier, GF 178
Xia, T 155

Y
Yadav, MK 195
Yamaguchi, S 135
Yanagi, K 184
Yang, FG 47
Yang, F-pG 53
Yang, H-C 196
Yang, J 188
Yang, J-J 141
Yan, H 135
Yan, JH 57
Yao, G 142
Yassa, M 10, 22, 52
Yeh, Y-Y 44
Yerys, B 145
Yesavage, J 195, 230
Yeung, L-K 137
Yi, H-G 126
Yi, S 108, 142
Yock, TI 177
Yokoyama, JS 37
Yonelinas, A 128, 186, 192
Yonelinas, AP 128, 221, 222
Yook, DW 208
YorkWilliams, S 176

Yoshida, W 60
Yousef, SM 127
You, Y 10, 58
Yuan, J 38
Yun, S 139
Yu, Q 162

Z
Zamzow, RM 142
Zanto, T 42, 204
Zarolia, P 150
Zarr, N 126
Zatorre, RJ 130
Zavaliangos-Petropulu,
A 184
Zaza, S 144
Zeitlin, M 134, 159
Zelinski, EL 138, 206
Zeng, Z 82
Zhang, F 79
Zhang, HR 51
Zhang, T 132
Zhang, Y 86
Zhan, L 112
Zhao, X 119
Zheng, Z 104
Zhou, P 105
Zhou, Y 39
Zhuang, J 130
Zhu, K 166
Ziat, M 210, 229
Zimmer, HD 185
Zimmerman, B 184
Zimmermann, SF 120
Zinchenko, A 150
Zinszer, B 132
Zoefel, B 113
Zola, SE 135
Zoltowski, D 28
Zreik, J 75
Zucker, H 221
Zweifel, H 208
Zweig, LJ 90

The MIT Press

Visit the

MIT PRESS

BOOTH

for a 30%

DISCOUNT

SUBJECTIVE TIME
The Philosophy, Psychology,
and Neuroscience of Temporality
edited by Valtteri Arstila
and Dan Lloyd
Interdisciplinary perspectives on the
feature of conscious life that scaﬀolds
every act of cognition: subjective time.
656 pp., 38 illus., $65 cloth

AFTER PHRENOLOGY
Neural Reuse and the
Interactive Brain
Michael L. Anderson
“With powerful metaphors, useful
conceptual tools, and inspiring
research ﬁndings, Anderson paints a
picture of a highly interactive human
brain and the sort of 21st-century
neuroscience framework that is
needed to explain how it creates a
human mind.”
—Lisa Feldman Barrett, University
Distinguished Professor of Psychology,
Northeastern University
A Bradford Book
432 pp., 7 color illus., 26 b&w illus., $45 cloth

SENSORY INTEGRATION AND
THE UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS
edited by David Bennett
and Christopher Hill
Philosophers and cognitive scientists
address the relationships among the
senses and the connections between
conscious experiences that form uniﬁed wholes.

SPACE IN MIND
Concepts for Spatial Learning
and Education
edited by Daniel R. Montello,
Karl Grossner, and Donald G. Janelle
Leading researchers oﬀer a range of
disciplinary perspectives on the implications of spatial thinking and reasoning for education and learning.

416 pp., 36 illus., $45 cloth

352 pp., 36 illus., $45 cloth

PROCESSING INACCURATE
INFORMATION
Theoretical and Applied
Perspectives from Cognitive Science
and the Educational Sciences
edited by David N. Rapp
and Jason L. G. Braasch
Interdisciplinary approaches to
identifying, understanding, and
remediating people’s reliance on
inaccurate information that they
should know to be wrong.

THE INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCE
OF CONSUMPTION
edited by Stephanie D. Preston,
Morten L. Kringelbach,
and Brian Knutson
preface by Peter Whybrow
Scholars from psychology, neuroscience, economics, animal behavior, and
evolution describe the latest research
on the causes and consequences of
overconsumption.

480 pp., 23 illus., $50 cloth

CONSCIOUSNESS, ATTENTION,
AND CONSCIOUS ATTENTION
Carlos Montemayor
and Harry Haroutioun Haladjian
A rigorous analysis of current empirical
and theoretical work supporting
the argument that consciousness and
attention are largely dissociated.
292 pp., 10 illus., $40 cloth

304 pp., 5 color illus., 9 b&w illus., $40 cloth

THE MORAL BRAIN
A Multidisciplinary Perspective
edited by Jean Decety
and Thalia Wheatley
An overview of the latest interdisciplinary research on human morality,
capturing moral sensibility as a sophisticated integration of cognitive, emotional, and motivational mechanisms.
328 pp., 8 illus., $35 cloth

THE COGNITIVE
NEUROSCIENCES V
edited by Michael S. Gazzaniga
and George R. Mangun
Praise for the previous edition:
“. . . a magniﬁcent accomplishment.
It covers topics from ions to consciousness, from reﬂexes to social psychology.
It is authoritative and encyclopedic,
but also lively and unafraid of controversy. . . a landmark of early twentyﬁrst-century science.”
—Steven Pinker, Harvard University;
author of How the Mind Works and The
Stuﬀ of Thought
1,144 pp., 87 color illus., 183 b&w illus., $195 cloth

CATEGORIZING COGNITION
Toward Conceptual Coherence in the
Foundations of Psychology
Graeme S. Halford, William H. Wilson,
Glenda Andrews, and Steven Phillips
A proposal for a categorization of
cognition based on core properties
of the constituent processes that integrates theory and empirical ﬁndings
across domains.
352 pp., 46 illus., $45 cloth

The MIT Press mitpress.mit.edu

Hotel Floor Plan
Street Level

Talks and Symposia
Registration

Atrium Level

Reception

244

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

2015 Annual Meeting

Hotel Floor Plan

Bay Level

Talks and
Symposia

Pacific Concourse

Exhibits & Posters

Cognitive Neuroscience Society

245

Schedule at a Glance
Saturday, March 28

Sunday, March 29

Monday, March 30

Tuesday, March 31

Precision stimulus presentation and cognitive testing
in the lab and on the web.

Comprehensive Test Library
• Affect Misattribution Procedure
• Balloon Analogue Risk Task
• Blackjack
• Stroop Test
• Columbia Card Task
• Continuous Performance Test
• Cyberball
• Delay Discounting Task
• Dictator Game
• Dot Probe Task
• Finger Tapping Task
• Game of Dice Task

• Go/No-Go Task
• Hungry Donkey Task
• Implicit Association Task
• Information Sampling Task
• Iowa Gambling Task
• Lexical Decision Task
• N-Back Task
• Operation Span Task
• Picture Story Exercise
• Rapid Visual Information Processing
• Reading Span Task
• Running Span Task

• Self-Ordered Pointing Task
• Simon Task
• Spatial Delayed Response Task
• Sternberg Memory Task
• Stop Signal Task
• Subliminal Priming
• Symmetry Span Task
• Time Estimation Tasks
• Tower of London Task
• Trail Making Test
• Visual Statistical Learning
• Wisconsin Card Sort Task

...and many more. Run them, customize them, or program your own.

Interface with fMRI, EEG, eye trackers and other neurophysiological instruments
Free trial download at www.milliseco
www.millisecond.com.
om. Supports M
Mac and PC.
sales@millisecond.com
isecond.com
second.com | 1-800-789-9710
0-789-9710

